Proﬁting from the Decoy Eﬀect:
A Case Study of an Online Diamond Retailer
Chunhua Wu and Koray Cosguner∗
Abstract
The decoy eﬀect (DE), ﬁrst introduced by Huber et al. (1982), has been robustly documented
across dozens of product categories and choice settings using lab experiments. However, it has
never been veriﬁed in a real product market in the literature. In this paper, we empirically test
and quantify the DE in the diamond sales of a leading online jewelry retailer. We develop a
diamond-level proportional hazard framework by jointly modeling market-level decoy–dominant
detection probabilities and the boost in sales upon detection of dominants. Results suggest that
decoy–dominant detection probabilities are low (11%–25%) in the diamond market; however,
upon detection, the DE increases dominant diamonds’ sale hazards signiﬁcantly (1.8–3.2 times).
In terms of the managerial signiﬁcance, we ﬁnd that the DE substantially increases the diamond
retailer’s gross proﬁt by 14.3%. We further conduct simulation studies to understand the DE’s
proﬁt impact under various dominance scenarios.
Keywords: Decoy Eﬀect, Attraction Eﬀect, Asymmetric Dominance Eﬀect, Context Depen-
dent Choice, Proportional Hazard Model, Diamond Pricing
∗Chunhua Wu (chunhua.wu@sauder.ubc.ca) is Assistant Professor of Marketing and Behavioral Science at the
University of British Columbia. Koray Cosguner (kcosgun@iu.edu) is Assistant Professor of Marketing at Indiana
University. The research idea originated from the ﬁrst author’s engagement ring purchase experience. The authors
thank the review team and seminar participants at the University of British Columbia, University of Alberta, Uni-
versity of Colorado at Boulder, Indiana University, University of Pittsburgh, Dartmouth College, the 2014 Marketing
Science Conference, 5th Empirical & Theoretical (ET) Symposium, and the 2017 UW &UBC Annual Marketing
Conference for their valuable feedback. The authors also thank Bridd Xu at Zbird.com for providing industry insights.
1

1 Introduction
The decoy eﬀect (Huber et al., 1982), also called attraction or asymmetric dominance eﬀect, refers
to the phenomenon of consumers having diﬀerent preferences for existing choice alternatives with
and without dominated (i.e., decoy) options in their choice sets. By design, these decoys are inferior
to some, but not to all, existing choice options. When such decoys exist, all else equal, dominant
options’ choice likelihoods get larger compared to cases when the decoys are not present. Since its
introduction, the decoy eﬀect (DE henceforth) has become one of the most popular and frequently
citedcontexteﬀectsintheconsumerbehaviorliterature, andithasbeenthoroughlyexaminedacross
dozens of product categories and choice domains using lab experiments (see, for example, Huber
et al., 1982; Huber and Puto, 1983; Wedell, 1991; Lehmann and Pan, 1994; Royle et al., 1999).
Despite its popularity, the DE’s practical validity has been severely challenged recently by a
series of unsuccessful replication attempts that shed light on the limits and boundaries of the eﬀect.
Frederick et al. (2014) showed that the DE can be observed only in very stylized settings, such as
the presentation of two products with two numerically depicted attributes. Yang and Lynn (2014)
provided additional support to these ﬁndings and questioned whether the DE has any practical
signiﬁcance, or if it is just an experimental artifact. The lack of documentation on the practice of
the DE in product markets was noted by Huber et al. (2014); and this has further put the practical
validity and signiﬁcance of the DE into question. In this paper, in response to these recent studies,
we provide strong empirical evidence that not only validates the DE in a real product market but
also illustrates its managerial signiﬁcance through quantifying the substantial proﬁt impact.
Even though it has been almost four decades since the DE was introduced, to the best of our
knowledge, there has been no empirical study that tests and quantiﬁes the DE with ﬁeld data.
To achieve this, one must consider and resolve a few key challenges. First, a researcher needs to
calibrate decoy–dominant relationships among product alternatives. Since products typically have
horizontalattributes—suchasbrand, taste, size, andpackaging—andconsumershaveheterogeneous
preferences for them, decoys to some consumers may not be decoys to others. Therefore, in most
product markets, strict decoy–dominant relationships may not exist, let alone permit calibration.
Second, consumers should be able to detectthe decoy–dominant relationships. Unlike in lab exper-
1

iments where alternatives with only two or three attributes are presented, choice scenarios in real
life are far more complex: in a typical consumer product category, alternatives have a much larger
number of attributes, e.g., brand, size, design, color, weight, packaging, taste, and price, to name
a few. Thus, it is much harder for consumers to fully evaluate the trade-oﬀs and detect existing
decoy–dominant relationships, so that, as noted in Huber et al. (1982), “the eﬀect may be less-
ened,” and the lack of detection becomes one important mitigating factor of the DE (Huber et al.,
2014). For consumers to detect decoy–dominant relationships, the choice decision must be salient
and require enough cognitive processing that consumers’ preferences can be constructed rather than
already revealed (Huber et al., 2014). For example, for trivial decisions, consumers may just make
their choices without paying much attention to the alternatives; consequently, they may not be
able to detect existing decoys/dominants. Similarly, for repeat-purchase products, added decoys
may not impact the choices of consumers who have already developed clear preferences for existing
alternatives. From a technical perspective, Simonson (2014) further called for a systematic study
separating decoy–dominant detection from the DE (i.e., sales boost in dominants upon detection).
Lastly, it is quite possible that decoy pricing strategies, i.e., introducing decoy–dominant relation-
ships by charging higher prices for the same or inferior quality products, may not generate positive
proﬁt impacts for ﬁrms, which limits the existence of the decoy pricing practice in the real world.
Due to the above-mentioned challenges, to empirically test and quantify the DE, we need data
from a product category 1) with a reasonably small number of vertical product attributes; 2) that is
important to consumers but not repeatedly purchased; and 3) that has the decoy pricing practice.
The online diamond market is a highly appropriate case for this purpose: diamonds are commodity-
type products with quality clearly deﬁned on a few vertical attributes such as carat, color, cut, and
clarity (4Cs); diamond purchases are important but not repeated lifetime decisions; and, ﬁnally, we
frequently observe decoy pricing patterns in the online diamond market.
We use diamond pricing and sales data from a major U.S. online jewelry retailer to empirically
test the DE’s existence, quantify its magnitude, and show its signiﬁcance for ﬁrm proﬁtability. We
validate that a diamond’s value is predominantly determined by its most important vertical at-
tributes, i.e., the 4Cs. Yet we also observe signiﬁcant price variation in the market for diamonds
2

with the same characteristics, and we construct dyadic decoy–dominant relationships among dia-
mond pairs based on their 4Cs and prices for our analysis. Data patterns show that dominants
have signiﬁcantly larger sale probabilities than diamonds that are neither decoys nor dominants,
while the opposite is true for decoys. The eﬀect for dominants, interestingly, doubles that for de-
coys (29% vs. 14%). Sales share regressions reveal that increasing the proportion of dominants in
the market would extract a dis-proportionally larger sales share from other diamonds. These data
patterns are consistent with the predictions of the DE but could also be explained qualitatively by
alternative mechanisms such as the reference price eﬀect, and consumer search. We develop formal
statistical tests to show that, quantitatively , there are strong statistical supports favoring the DE
over the reference price explanation and that the observed price variation are consistent with the
DE coexisting with consumer search but cannot be explained solely by consumer search.
Given the data providing evidence of the DE, we formally develop a proportional hazard frame-
work in our empirical analysis. Modeling the impact of decoy diamonds on sales of their dominants
requires us to separate the market-level decoy–dominant detection from the sales boost once dia-
monds are detected as dominants. To achieve that, we incorporate two critical components into our
proposed hazard framework: market-level decoy–dominant detection probability anddominant boost
hazardupon dominant detection. Thus, in our setting, upon the dominant detection, the dominant
boost hazard component is used to test the existence and measure the magnitude of the DE.
In the estimation, we use a diamond’s characteristics, daily demand factors, competition from
other similar diamonds, and the observed decoy–dominant structure to control for the diﬀerences
in the sale hazards of diamonds. To capture potential consumer heterogeneity in response to decoy
pricing, we divide the diamonds into three price segments (low: $2K–$5K; medium: $5K–$10K;
and high: $10K–$20K) and estimate segment-speciﬁc detection probabilities and sale boosts upon
dominant detection. Further, to capture the unobserved heterogeneity and correlations in diamond
sales, we use a diamond-level random eﬀect speciﬁcation. Results suggest that the market-level
detection probability for a decoy (or dominant) diamond is quite low, ranging from 11% in the high-
price segment to 25% in the low-price segment. The low decoy–dominant detection probabilities
conﬁrmthatmodelingthedetectionprobabilitiesexplicitlyisrequiredtoquantifytheDEaccurately.
3

As opposed to low detection probabilities, upon detection, we ﬁnd that a dominant diamond’s sale
hazardgets2.7, 1.8, and3.2timeslargerinthelow-, medium-, andhigh-pricesegments, respectively.
This ﬁnding validates the DE in the ﬁeld in response to recent studies questioning this aspect,
including Frederick et al. (2014) and Yang and Lynn (2014). Next, we quantify the proﬁt impact
of the DE and ﬁnd that the DE improves the retailer’s gross proﬁt by 14.3%. This ﬁnding shows
that the DE is not only real but also highly substantive managerially. Finally, through additional
simulation studies, we show that the proﬁt impact of the DE gets larger as the number of decoys
increases; as the price variation increases; and as the market-level detection probability remains
similar, decreases, and increases in the low-, medium-, and high-price segments, respectively.
To reiterate our contribution, we advance the literature on the DE by empirically separating
the market-level decoy–dominant detection from the DE boost of decoys on dominants. More
importantly, for the ﬁrst time in the literature, we 1) validate the existence of the DE in a real
market; 2) quantify its magnitude across diﬀerent segments; and 3) show its substantive proﬁt
impact. This paper thus attenuates the recent concerns (Frederick et al., 2014; Yang and Lynn,
2014) about the practical validity of this classical context eﬀect beyond traditional lab settings.
2 Literature Review
This paper contributes to two streams of literature: the general consumer behavior literature on
context-dependent choices (in particular, the DE) and the empirical consumer choice-modeling
literature in marketing and economics.
Standard rational choice models in economics and marketing are built upon the revealed prefer-
ence assumption, which implicitly assumes two principles: the principle of regularity (Luce, 1977)
and the principle of independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA) (Luce, 1959). In contrast, con-
sumer behavior researchers adopted the notion of constructed preference (Bettman et al., 1998),
and they extensively documented context eﬀects in consumer choices (Tversky, 1972; Simonson,
1989). The DE (Huber et al., 1982), which is a classic example of such context eﬀects, violates
both regularity and IIA principles. The DE has been examined across dozens of product categories
and choice domains (see, for example, Huber et al., 1982; Huber and Puto, 1983; Wedell, 1991;
4

Lehmann and Pan, 1994; Royle et al., 1999). Further, the literature features investigations of cog-
nitive processes and mechanisms moderating the DE and related context eﬀects (see, for example,
Ratneshwar et al., 1987; Heath et al., 1995; Khan et al., 2011; Müller et al., 2014; Guo and Wang,
2016; Morewedge et al., 2018). In this domain, Khan et al. (2011) studied the inﬂuence of choice
construal on context eﬀects and found that high construal as opposed to low increases the size of
the DE. Morewedge et al. (2018) demonstrated that when comparisons of alternatives for choice
makers require social comparisons, the context eﬀects get stronger. Guo and Wang (2016) studied
underlying causes of context eﬀects and found that the response time can mediate the compromise
eﬀect, but the context information cannot. Despite an ample amount of research devoted to the
DE, empirical test and quantiﬁcation of the eﬀect in a real product market has not been achieved
yet. Our paper ﬁlls this important gap by validating the DE in the ﬁeld.
Despite its wide acceptance, the limits and boundaries of the DE have been debated by multiple
studies recently. Frederick et al. (2014) stated that the DE could only be observed in very stylized
lab settings with 2 2 numerical depictions of the products (two products with two attributes, with
a decoy to one product added to the choice set later). Through 38 replication attempts, their study
showed that when the product attributes are depicted with perceptual representations and verbal
descriptions (rather than numerical), the DE weakens, dies, or gives way to the repulsion eﬀect.
Through 91 replication attempts, Yang and Lynn (2014) also showed that replicating the DE is
very diﬃcult with verbal and pictorial depictions of product attributes. With the current research,
we respond to concerns of Frederick et al. (2014) and Yang and Lynn (2014) by providing strong
empirical evidence of the existence of the DE in a real product market.
In response to Frederick et al. (2014) and Yang and Lynn (2014), Simonson (2014) underlined
the importance of recognizing the set formation, i.e., subjects being aware of decoy–dominant re-
lationships, in being able to replicate the DE. He argued that consumers’ choices require them
to make multiple trade-oﬀ contrasts simultaneously. As a result, they may not be able to make
their decisions based on existing decoy–dominant conﬁgurations, especially if such conﬁgurations
are diﬃcult to detect. He thus called for a systematic study on the drivers of decoy–dominant
detection. In addition, Huber et al. (2014) recognized the lack of practice of the DE in today’s
5

product markets, noting that it is diﬃcult to observe the DE in a real product market since the
detection of decoys is typically very hard for consumers due to numerous alternatives with many
attributes. With this research, we respond to the call of Simonson (2014) by explicitly modeling
decoy–dominant detection in the studied online diamond market to empirically quantify the DE.
Our study is also closely related to consumer choice models in economics and marketing litera-
ture. Classicmultinomiallogitandprobitmodelsarebuiltupontherevealedpreferenceassumption,
thus they cannot directly account for context eﬀects. A few empirical and analytical methods have
been developed to incorporate the context eﬀects into the choice models. Tversky (1972) formulated
his well-recognized Elimination-By-Aspects (EBA) model to account for the similarity eﬀect. Ka-
makura and Srivastava (1984) modiﬁed the standard multinomial probit model to account for the
similarity eﬀect by modifying the error structure through incorporating similarity-based error cor-
relations. Kivetz et al. (2004) proposed a choice model that can account for the compromise eﬀect.
Orhun (2009) developed an analytical choice model to study the decoy and compromise eﬀects under
the loss-aversion assumption. Rooderkerk et al. (2011) proposed an empirical choice model that can
incorporate decoy, compromise, and similarity eﬀects all together. They used choice-based conjoint
data to estimate their proposed model and showed that ignoring context eﬀects signiﬁcantly biases
the choice model’s predictions. Our paper adopts a diﬀerent approach by developing a proportional
hazard model that explicitly accounts for the DE using pricing and sales data.
Since the studied online diamond retailer oﬀers a large number of diamonds daily, as discussed
earlier we separate the detection of decoys/dominants and the boost in sales upon dominant de-
tection. Accordingly, our decoy/dominant detection component serves the role of a market-level
consideration model. Due to that, our research is also related to the empirical literature that sep-
arately considers consumers’ consideration sets and choices. Existing studies in that domain use
consumer-level data to model consumers’ consideration and choice decisions together. Some studies
use purchase data only (see, for example, Siddarth et al., 1995; Chiang et al., 1998; Van Nierop
et al., 2010), while others use purchase along with search-related data (see, for example, De los
Santos et al., 2012; Honka, 2014). Unlike those studies, we don’t observe either purchase or search
behaviors at the individual level. Hence, we derive a diamond-level hazard model from individual
6

primitives, including consideration sets and choice. Consequently, our hazard speciﬁcation provides
a framework to separately estimate the market-level decoy/dominant detection from the DE by
solely utilizing the aggregate product pricing and sales data.
In the following sections, we ﬁrst describe the online diamond market, our dataset, and how we
calibrate the decoy–dominant relationships, then we provide data evidence on the existence of the
DE in this market. We develop our model framework in Section 5, and we present the estimation
results and illustrate the DE’s managerial implications in the subsequent two sections. Finally, we
conclude with a discussion of the current study’s limitations and oﬀer directions for future research.
3 Data
3.1 Online Diamond Market
Several U.S. retailers emerged in the online market for diamonds and jewelry products in the past
two decades. We use panel data from a major retailer in this market. In ﬁscal year 2015, the retailer
reported net sales of $480 million. According to industry reports, it has around 50% market share
of the U.S. online diamond market, with sales approximately three times greater than its closest
competitor. These ﬁgures clearly indicate that the retailer is the leading player in the market.
The retailer sells a variety of jewelry products to end consumers, such as unbranded loose
diamonds, gemstones, engagement and wedding rings,1bracelets, necklaces, and earrings. Loose
diamonds account for the core part of the retailer’s business in terms of revenue contribution.
According to its annual report, the retailer works with dozens of diamond suppliers worldwide
under an “exclusivity” agreement, which requires suppliers to sell their diamonds only through the
retailer’s online channel, and not through their own or other competing online and oﬄine channels.
For listed diamonds, the identities of the suppliers are not revealed on the retailer’s website so that
consumers cannot diﬀerentiate diamonds based on the suppliers. Instead, consumers recognize only
the retailer name as the diamond brand. To operate in a cost-eﬃcient manner, the retailer uses a
1Buying a diamond ring from the retailer requires a consumer to choose his/her loose diamond ﬁrst and then a
ring setting. Consumers pay the total price, and the diamond ring is then assembled by the retailer. Typically, the
loose diamond accounts for more than 90% of the total price paid by consumers.
7

drop-shippingbusinessmodel, i.e., theretailer, inmostcases, doesnotphysicallycarryinventoriesof
loose diamonds listed on its website. Instead, it purchases diamonds from corresponding suppliers
when consumers place their orders with the retailer. Unlike traditional brick-and-mortar stores,
where only a limited number of diamonds are available, this drop-shipping model allows the retailer
to list more than a hundred thousand diamonds every day.
In this setting, suppliers list their diamonds on the retailer’s website and establish wholesale
prices. The retailer then adds a ﬁxed percentage markup to the wholesale prices. Per the retailer’s
annualreport, themarkupisﬁxedataround18–20%foralldiamonds. Becausetheretailerchoosesa
ﬁxed margin over wholesale prices, the decoy pricing structure ultimately comes from the suppliers.2
Nevertheless, consumers are expected to respond to the decoy–dominant structure regardless of
whether the retailer or the suppliers create it. That being the case, as we demonstrate later, the
dominance structure still aﬀects the retailer’s sales and ultimately its proﬁtability to a large extent.
Since more than a hundred thousand diamonds are listed each day, the retailer provides ﬁltering
and sorting tools that help consumers to search for diamonds. On the website, a consumer can
ﬁlter diamonds based on a desired range of diamond characteristics (such as price, carat, clarity,
etc.). The website then returns a list of all the diamonds that fall into the ﬁltering criteria on a
single page in the default ascending price order. This one-page structure requires the consumer to
scroll down to check all diamonds ﬁltered. The web page displays each diamond in a row with its
carat, cut, color, clarity (4Cs henceforth), and price information. The consumer needs to further
click into a diamond’s details page to check other less-signiﬁcant characteristics such as symmetry
and polish. The website also allows the consumer to sort the diamonds based on any one of the 4Cs
or price. Given abundant diamonds from the retailer, the consumer would still face a long list of
diamonds (hundreds to thousands) even after a few rounds of ﬁltering and sorting. The list typically
includes many decoys and dominants that are not easy to detect without laborious investigation.
In addition, because consumers are presented with a list of diamonds according to their set criteria,
this search process resembles the non-sequential search that is consistent with our derivation of the
2We note that the supplier price variation may exist due to multiple reasons. First, due to consumer search costs,
the observed prices can be the outcome of a mixed-strategy price equilibrium on the supplier side. Second, suppliers
might have diﬀerent costs, resulting in diﬀerent pricing functions. Third, suppliers may change prices at diﬀerent
times. Understanding the source of the price variation is beyond the scope of the current study. Instead, we focus
on quantifying the DE given the observed price variation in our data.
8

diamond-level hazard model from individual primitives (see Web Appendix B for the details).
3.2 Data Description
We construct a panel data set of diamond prices and sales from this online retailer. We collect
our daily data from the retailer’s website through a web crawler for the period from February 2011
to September 2011. For each diamond listed during our sample period, we observe the diamond’s
inherent physical characteristics and daily prices until the diamond is sold. In the data, diamond
prices typically change over time: on average, each diamond’s price changes once every 21 days,
conditional upon it being unsold. Figure 1 provides an example of price dynamics among three 1.0-
carat diamonds from the day of introduction in the market till the end of the observation period.
Figure 1: Diamond Price Patterns Over Time
As seen in Figure 1, the diamond prices can go up and down, and each diamond may have a
unique price pattern over time. We infer that a diamond is sold through the retailer’s website on
the last day it is listed as available, based on its unique SKU number.3On average, it takes about
50 days to sell a diamond.
In our analysis, we focus speciﬁcally on round-shaped diamonds with prices ranging between
$2K and $20K. Round-shaped diamonds are the most popular ones among those listed (74%) and
3We believe this is a reasonable approach because, as discussed earlier, the suppliers are under an exclusive channel
agreement with the retailer so that the diamond sale would not have happened through other channels. Accordingly,
until a diamond is sold, its supplier is expected to keep listing the diamond on the retailer’s website. That said, we
acknowledge the sale time of a diamond to be inferred based on its removal day as a limitation of the current research.
9

sold (78%).4Diamonds in diﬀerent price ranges might be more attractive to diﬀerent segments
of buyers with various budget levels. To account for the potential heterogeneity in the DE across
consumer segments, we further divide the diamonds into low- ($2K–$5K), medium- ($5K–$10K)
and high-price ($10K–$20K) segments based on their ﬁrst-day market prices.
Before calibrating the decoy–dominant structure, we ﬁrst examine what determines diamond
prices. We run a linear regression with (log- of) daily diamond prices as our dependent variable
and the diamonds’ physical characteristics as independent variables to uncover the secret diamond-
pricing formula. To control for potential demand variation across periods, we also add day ﬁxed
eﬀects to the regression. We report the regression results in Table 1. The adjusted R-squared
measure for the model with 4Cs, along with day ﬁxed eﬀects, is as high as 96.67%. Individual
regressions for each day yield adjusted R-squared measures ranging between 94.92% and 96.57%.
Theresultsprovideevidencethat4Csarethepredominantattributesindeterminingdiamondprices.
To further check the robustness, we ran several regressions by incorporating other diamond
attributes, such as symmetry and polish, into our regression model. Overall, the R-squared measure
does not improve. Moreover, these additional variables have mostly insigniﬁcant estimates that
are notably smaller in magnitude compared to the 4C estimates. For example, the implied price
diﬀerence contributed by symmetry and polish turns out to be less than 0.5%. Thus, we have
strong statistical evidence to conclude that 4Cs of a diamond can represent its quality very precisely.
Accordingly, in our analysis, we label each unique 4C combination as a grade.
Characterizing a diamond as a combination of its 4Cs and price is, indeed, quite consistent
with industry reports on diamond valuations and with articles educating consumers on purchasing
diamonds. Eventhoughthevariationindiamonds’physicalattributesexplainsalargeportionofthe
price variation, we still observe signiﬁcant within-grade and within-day price variation. Speciﬁcally,
in the data, the average of the ratios of price standard deviation to the mean price at each day-
grade combination is 0.1, indicating a suﬃciently large within-grade and within-day price variation.
This variation is essential to characterize the dyadic decoy–dominant relationships among every
diamond-pair, as discussed next.
4Diamond shape can be considered as a horizontal attribute. Thus, including only round-shaped diamonds would
not aﬀect our decoy–dominant constructions since no decoy–dominant relationships exist across diamond shapes.
Further, we believe most consumers commit to a particular shape before choosing among other attributes.
10

Table 1: Diamond Price Regression Model: ln(price) on 4Cs and day ﬁxed eﬀects
Variable Estimate S.E.
Carat 1:768**0:0004
Poor 0:000
Good 0:056**0:0009
Cut Very Good 0:114**0:0009
Ideal 0:180**0:0009
Signature Ideal 0:231**0:0013
J 0:000
I 0:141**0:0004
H 0:268**0:0004
Color (Low to High) G 0:361**0:0003
F 0:455**0:0003
E 0:503**0:0004
D 0:583**0:0004
SI2 0:000
SI1 0:124**0:0003
VS2 0:274**0:0003
VS1 0:371**0:0003
Clarity (Low to High) VVS2 0:455**0:0003
VVS1 0:544**0:0003
IF 0:619**0:0004
FL 0:762**0:0004
Daily Dummies included
Adj. R-squared 96:67%
Adj. R-squared w/o daily dummies 95:27%
Adj. R-squared w/ daily separate regressions 94.92%–96.57%
Note:Estimates withandare signiﬁcant at the 0.10 and 0.05 levels, respectively.
3.3 Dominance Construction
By deﬁnition, a diamond Bis a decoy to another diamond AwhenBis inferior to Ain at least
one attribute, but has no superior attribute. In our speciﬁc setting, we deﬁne a diamond as a decoy
under two conditions: 1) In terms of 4Cs, Bis inferior in at least one attribute to Aand has no
attribute superior to Abut has the same or a higher price than A; and 2)Bhas the same 4Cs as
Abut is priced at least 5% higher.5Under the two decoy deﬁnitions, for any two diamonds on a
5Under the strict deﬁnition, two same-grade diamonds with diﬀerent prices must have a dominance relationship.
However, in real purchase situations, consumers may not care much about (or even notice) small price diﬀerences.
Thus, we use a conservative approach, deﬁning a dominance relationship only if the price diﬀerence between the two is
larger than 5%. This 5% rule helps us avoid the potential problem of deﬁning a false dominance relationship when the
dominated diamond is, indeed, superior in other non-critical attributes such as symmetry and polish. Our regressions
show that the price premium contributed by these non-critical attributes is less than 0.5%. As a robustness check,
we replicate our analysis under the 1% and 10% rules and obtain similar results.
11

particular day, we deﬁne the relationship between them as follows: AdominatesB(AB),B
dominatesA(BA), and no dominance ( AB).
In our data sample, every pairwise decoy–dominant relationship between all listed diamonds is
constructed for each day.6For a particular diamond j, for each day t, we create two measures:
number of diamonds that are decoys ( NDecoy
jt), and dominants ( NDominant
jt ) to that diamond. The
median number of decoys and dominants that a diamond has is 7 in the data, while the distribution
is right-skewed. Since the number of diamonds varies across diﬀerent grades signiﬁcantly, there
exist large variation in the number of decoys/dominants across grades. Hence, we normalize the
two measures by dividing them by the number of diamonds in the grade on the same day, and label
the grade-level percentage measures of decoys and dominants as RDecoy
jtandRDominant
jt, respectively.
4 Data Evidence of the DE
In this section, we discuss some data patterns and reduced-form analyses that are suggestive of the
DE. We show that important data patterns cannot be solely explained by alternative mechanisms
such as the reference price eﬀect or consumer search without considering the DE.
4.1 Dominance Types and Diamond Sales
Based on the dominance construction, on day t, diamondjcan belong to one of the four mutually
exclusive groups: 1) neither decoy nor dominant: RDecoy
jt = 0andRDominant
jt = 0; 2) decoy only:
RDecoy
jt = 0andRDominant
jt>0; 3) dominant only: RDecoy
jt> 0 andRDominant
jt = 0; and 4) both
decoy and dominant: RDecoy
jt>0andRDominant
jt>0. The middle column of Table 2 shows the
count of diamond-day observations for each diamond type. Due to the signiﬁcant within-grade price
variation, we observe that a majority of the diamonds fall into the both decoy and dominant type.
6Wewouldliketoacknowledgethatomittingdiamondsfromcompetingretailersmaycreatebiasesintheestimated
size of the DE if the majority of consumers search and compare diamonds from multiple retailers. Given that the
studied retailer is the dominant player in the market with about 50% market share, we expect such practices to be less
common. Even if consumers search across competitors, it is laborious for them to compare diamonds from multiple
retailers altogether since each retailer provides its search/ﬁltering tools, i.e., pooling diamonds from diﬀerent retailers
is not trivial. As discussed earlier, even with the focal retailer’s ﬁltering tools, the lists of diamonds consumers face
tend to be very large. In other words, it is very diﬃcult for consumers to detect the decoy–dominant relationships
from a single retailer—a fact also conﬁrmed by our estimated decoy–dominant detection probabilities—let alone
comparing across sites. Finally, each retailer’s brand may be perceived as a horizontal attribute, making decoy–
dominant calibrations invalid across retailers. That being said, if consumer search data across multiple retailers
become available, modeling the DE beyond a single retailer can be an interesting future research direction.
12

However, even in the smallest group, i.e., neither decoy nor dominant , we have a suﬃcient number
of observations (27,077) to allow the identiﬁcation of our model, as we discuss later.
We summarize the percentage of diamonds sold in the total diamond-day observations across
diﬀerent diamond types in the last column of Table 2. Each cell is calculated by dividing the number
of diamonds sold in each diamond type by that type’s total diamond-day observations. For example,
there are 404,283 decoy only diamond-day observations, out of which 6,792 were sold, yielding the
average sale probability of 1.68%. Table 2 shows that decoy only diamonds have the lowest average
sale probability (1.68%), while the opposite is true for dominant only diamonds (2.53%). The both
type diamonds have a slightly higher average sale probability than the neithertype.
Table 2: Summary Statistics Across Diamond Types
Diamond Type Diamond-Day Observations Daily Percentage Sales
Neither decoy nor dominant 27;077 1 :96%
Decoy only 404;283 1 :68%
Dominant only 340;456 2 :53%
Both decoy and dominant 1;945;009 2 :08%
Total 2;716;825 2 :07%
In addition, we explore how the overall dominance structure impacts the sales shares of diﬀerent
diamond types using two linear regressions. We use the daily sales share of decoys (in percentage)
and the sales share of dominants as the dependent variables and include price-segment dummies and
percentage of decoy only and percentage of dominant only diamonds in each segment as independent
variables. Results reported in Table 3 show that the percentage of decoy only diamonds signiﬁcantly
increases the decoys’ sales share, while the percentage of dominant only diamonds signiﬁcantly
increases the sales share of dominants but reduces that of decoys.
Table 3: Diamond Sales Share Regression
VariableDecoy Sales Share Dominant Sales Share
Estimate S.E. Estimate S.E.
Intercept 0:023 0 :026 0:048 0 :040
Medium Segment(5K–10K) 0:006 0 :016 0:0820:025
High Segment(10K–20K)  0:008 0 :021 0:0860:032
% Decoys 0:8990:198 0 :161 0 :301
% Dominants  0:3120:155 1 :9720:236
Adj. R-squared 0:118 0 :117
Note:Estimates withandare signiﬁcant at the 0.10 and 0.05 levels, respectively. The average value of
% Decoys and % Dominants are 0.14 and 0.13, respectively.
13

Qualitatively, the patterns presented in Tables (2) and (3) could be explained by reference price
eﬀect or consumer search. Dominants are in general more preferred by consumers because their
prices are relatively lower than comparable diamonds, whereas the opposite is the case for decoys
(reference price eﬀect). Beyond the relative price disadvantage, a decoy only diamond may also
be detected as a decoy by a segment of consumers who search extensively, and it would never be
purchased upon detection, leading to a further reduction in the sale probability (consumer search).
Notably, the average sale probability of a decoy is still much larger than zero; thus, it is critical to
control for decoy detection in our analysis. The sales share regression results in Table (3) are also
directionally consistent with consumer search because having relatively more decoy only diamonds
in the market would reduce the chances of consumers discovering these decoys along with their
dominants. In other words, as there is a larger share of decoy only diamonds, the size of the market
segment detecting them as decoys is expected to decrease, leading the sales share of decoys to
increase. Similarly, as the percentage of dominant only diamonds increases, consumers are more
likely to include them in their search process, leading to an increase in the sales share of dominants.
Quantitatively, however, the magnitude of diﬀerences in the average sale probabilities across
the diamond types and the magnitude of the regression estimates could be suggestive of additional
eﬀects beyond reference price and consumer search. The average sale probability diﬀerence between
adominant only and aneithertype diamond (0.57%) is twice the diﬀerence between a neither
typeand adecoy only diamond (0.28%). Since buying decoys and dominants can be seen (by
consumers)asmonetarylossesandgains, respectively, basedontheprospecttheory(Tversky,1972),
reference price eﬀect would predict the exact opposite pattern, i.e., the former probability diﬀerence
is expected to be smaller than the latter. Consumer search, on the other hand, could explain the
signiﬁcant reduction in the average sale probability for decoys (due to the segment detecting them
never purchasing them), but it could hardly explain the signiﬁcant boost in the sales of dominants,
especially when the eﬀect is twice that of decoys. In addition, we would expect the sales share of
dominants to increase proportionally with the increase in the percentage of dominants based on
random consumer search, yet the estimated elasticity is as high as 1.97, signiﬁcantly larger than
1.0, suggesting that including additional dominant only diamonds would extract a disproportionally
larger sales share from other diamonds. All this evidence suggests that there is a signiﬁcant boost
eﬀect in the sale probabilities for dominants, which is not completely explained by reference price
14

Figure 2: Sale Probability Function According to Diﬀerent Theories
eﬀect or consumer search, yet is very consistent with the predictions from the DE.
We further develop formal statistical tests to show evidence consistent with the DE instead of
reference price eﬀect and beyond consumer search explanations in the following subsections.
4.2 Decoy Eﬀect vs. Reference Price Eﬀect
The marketing literature has extensively examined the importance of relative price comparisons
in consumers’ purchase decisions (Monroe, 1973). The reference prices could be formed based on
contextual factors such as the distribution of market prices (Biswas and Blair, 1991; Rajendran and
Tellis, 1994), or temporal anchoring stimuli such as a product’s past prices (Lynch Jr et al., 1991;
Rajendran and Tellis, 1994). In our particular context, given that diamonds are not repeat-purchase
products and there are thousands of diamonds available each day, it is more likely that consumers
form reference prices based on contextual factors rather than temporal anchors (Kalyanaram and
Winer, 1995). When consumers use average grade-level price as the reference, the prospect theory
(Kahneman, 1979) predicts that 1) consumers respond positively to dominants (in the monetary
gain domain) and negatively to decoys (in the loss domain); and 2) the response to decoys would
be stronger than to dominants (of the same size) due to loss aversion.
Even though the reference price eﬀect (RPE henceforth) and decoy eﬀect may look similar at
ﬁrst glance, we would like to emphasize a few notable diﬀerences that we illustrate in Figure 2. First,
15

the RPE gradually vanishes as the monetary gains or losses approach zero. In other words, the RPE
predicts the sale probability function to be continuous as the price of a diamond moves from the gain
to the loss domain (i.e., around the reference price point). To the contrary, under the decoy eﬀect,
we expect a discrete jump in the sale probability function around the reference point—because,
as a non-decoy diamond turns into a decoy one, a market segment emerges with zero probability
of purchasing it upon detection, resulting in a downward jump in the sale probability function
around the decoy threshold price. The opposite becomes the case as a non-dominant diamond
turns into a dominant one: a market segment with signiﬁcantly large purchase probability emerges,
and this segment induces the sale probability to jump upward around the dominant threshold
price. Thus, the sale probability function is expected to be discontinuous around the reference price
point with the decoy eﬀect. Further, the magnitude of the discrete jump (around the reference
price) depends on the market-level detection probabilities for decoys; and on both the market-level
detection probabilities and the strength of the DE (i.e., sales boost) for dominants.
Second, the predicted relative eﬀects across the domains (loss to gain/decoy to dominant) are
diﬀerent under the RPE and the DE. The RPE predicts the slope of the sale probability function to
be steeper for decoys than for dominants. We would argue the opposite is more likely to be the case
under the DE explanation, because further reducing the prices of dominants would not only increase
the size of the consumer segment who detects them as dominants but also elevate the attractiveness
of these dominants (i.e., the sales boost level) upon detection. However, as prices of decoys increase,
it gets easier for consumers to detect them, i.e., the size of the market segment that fails to detect
them decreases. Note that only this shrinking segment would respond to the increasing prices (or
monetary losses) of decoys since the other segment would eliminate them upon detection irrespective
of the loss amount’s size. Therefore, with the DE, the sale probability function is expected to have
a steeper slope in the gain domain, and a ﬂatter slope in the loss domain.
We estimate three diamond-level logistic sales regressions to test whether our data support the
DE theory rather than the RPE. The results of these three speciﬁcations are reported in Table 4.
In the regressions, we control for the following variables: a diamond’s 4Cs, daily demand eﬀects
such as weekday and holiday dummies, the Google search indexes for diamond-related keywords,
and the number of diamonds in the same grade. We deﬁne the reference price as the average price
of diamonds belonging to the same grade. Central to our test, we include separate intercepts and
16

separate price slopes ( PGainandPLossas percentage diﬀerences relative to the reference price)
for diamonds in the GainandLossdomains in the ﬁrst regression. We replace the deﬁnition
ofGainandLosswithDominant andDecoy, and the relative prices with interactions with the
Dominant andDecoydummies in the second and third regressions. The diﬀerence between the last
two speciﬁcations is that the deﬁnition of Dominant andDecoyis based on whether a diamond has
any decoys or dominants in speciﬁcation (I), while in speciﬁcation (II) we use a stricter deﬁnition
of whether a diamond is a decoy only ordominant only type. The regression speciﬁcations follow
the tradition in empirical tests of the RPE (Hardie et al., 1993; Bell and Lattin, 2000).
Table 4: Diamond Sales Response Function with Logistic Regressions
VariableGain/Loss Decoy/Dominant(I) Decoy/Dominant(II)
Estimate S.E. Estimate S.E. Estimate S.E.
Controls included included included
Intercept— Gain  0:028 0 :019
Intercept— Loss  0:006 0 :019
Intercept— Dominant 0:1520:014 0 :1400:018
Intercept— Decoy  0:1860:014 0:2050:019
Slope—PGain  2:4440:145
Slope—PLoss  1:7330:156
Slope—PGainDominant  1:4910:131 1:8310:192
Slope—PLossDecoy  1:0590:137 0:5670:211
Slope Diﬀerence (Loss  Gain) 0:6860:215 0 :4320:218 1 :2640:292
AIC 525,333 525,016 525,191
Note:Estimates withandare signiﬁcant at the 0.10 and 0.05 levels, respectively.
The results show a very consistent pattern with the price coeﬃcient more negative in the
gain/dominant domain than in the loss/decoy domain across the three regressions. The diﬀer-
ences between the slopes (loss minus gain) are all signiﬁcantly positive at the 0.05 level, as shown in
the table. In addition, intercepts for dominants are signiﬁcantly positive while those for decoys are
signiﬁcantly negative in the last two regressions, indicating the existence of a discrete jump around
the reference price point. This is consistent with our earlier discussion about the role of the DE.
Lastly, the models with the DE outperform the RPE-only model based on the AICs. These results
are all robust to alternative model speciﬁcations, such as separating the eﬀects across the three price
segments and including quadratic terms for relative prices. Overall, our test results show strong
statistical support favoring the DE over the RPE, as illustrated in Figure 2.
17

4.3 Decoy Eﬀect vs. Consumer Search
As Simonson (2014) emphasized, consumers’ detection of decoy–dominant relationships is a precon-
dition for the DE. Given the extremely large number of alternatives in the online diamond market,
consumers rely on search to ﬁnalize their consideration sets. Thus, consumer search is an inherent
component in our test for the DE (see our Model section). In this subsection, we develop a formal
statistical test to check whether the data patterns can be solely explained by consumer search, or if
there is evidence of the DE in addition to consumer search. Our test relies on the observed market
price dispersion and sales information. We provide the details of this test in Web Appendix A.
The intuition behind the test is that under pure consumer search without the DE, a supplier sets
prices to maximize the expected proﬁt of each individual diamond, and thus identical diamonds
with diﬀerent prices are expected to generate the same level of proﬁt for the supplier in equilibrium
(Burdett and Judd, 1983). However, if there is DE along with consumer search, a supplier needs
to consider the price optimization beyond each individual diamond because decoys would serve as
“loss leaders” helping the supplier get higher expected proﬁts from the dominants. Consequently,
one would expect the proﬁt contribution of dominants to be higher than that of decoys.
UnderthehypothesisofnoDE(i.e., thereisonlysearcheﬀect), wecanutilizetheobservedprices
and sales information to recover the cost of each diamond jon dayt(cjt)from the corresponding
supply-side pricing optimality conditions. Recovered costs should be approximately the same for
diamonds with identical 4Cs, and exactly the same for the same diamond over time. However, if
there exists DE along with consumer search, because of the positive proﬁt externality from decoys to
dominants, the recovered costs from the optimality conditions will be higher for decoys and lower for
dominants, as compared to their true costs. This essentially leads to a positive correlation between
the diamonds’ recovered costs and their relative price levels. The test of the pure search eﬀect versus
the search eﬀect along with the DE thus becomes the same as testing whether recovered costs are
increasing with relative prices. Accordingly, we conduct two statistical tests: 1) using cross-diamond
price variation (labeled as Test I); and 2) using within-diamond price variation over time (labeled as
Test II). Results (see Table A1 in Web Appendix A) consistently reject the null hypothesis of a pure
consumer search explanation across all three diamond price segments. All the estimated coeﬃcients
of relative price levels ( rpjt) are positive and signiﬁcant, and thus are directionally consistent with
18

the hypothesis supporting the existence of the DE together with consumer search in our data.
To sum up, our data analyses yield the following results: 1) A diamond’s sale probability
largely depends on whether it is a decoy and/or a dominant; 2) It is critical to account for decoy-
dominant detection in validating the DE; and 3) There is suggestive evidence of the DE beyond
alternative mechanisms of the RPE and consumer search. Hence, empirical investigation of the
decoy phenomenon requires a deliberately developed model, which we introduce in the next section.
5 Model
We develop a diamond-level proportional hazard model to study daily diamond sales. We control
for the eﬀect of diamond characteristics and market demand and supply factors in a baseline daily
diamond sale hazard component. We further capture the role of the DE on diamond sales with
ourdominance hazard component. Separating the DE from other factors that aﬀect diamond sales
is a challenging task since consumer-level search and purchase behaviors are unobserved in our
setting. To achieve the objective, we derive our diamond-level proportional hazard from underlying
consumer primitives including consumer arrival process ,search,consideration set formation , and
conditional choice probabilities with the embedded DE . Please see Web Appendix B for the details of
our derivation including how the DE is embedded into consumers’ conditional choice probabilities,
and how the proposed hazard speciﬁcation is used to quantify the DE at the market level. Following
this derivation, we use the following to denote the hazard that diamond jwill be sold on day t:
hj(t) = j(Xjt;)j(Djt;); (1)
where j()andj()are the daily diamond sale hazard and the dominance hazard components,
respectively. We next discuss each component with the choice and rationale of the corresponding
variables. We present an overview of the variables in Table 5.
5.1 Daily Diamond Sale Hazard
The daily diamond sale hazard component (  j()) captures the baseline daily diamond sale likeli-
hoods without the DE consideration. In general, a diamond’s daily sale likelihood depends on a
few essential factors. First, since diamond buyers with various budgetary constraints have diﬀerent
19

Table 5: List of Variables Used in Model Estimation
Variable Name Description
Daily Diamond Sale Hazard ( Xjt)
KjDiamond segment Segment dummies, low (2K–5K), medium (5K–10K), high (10K–20K)
ZtGoogle search indexes Daily Google search trends index of diamond-related keywords
Weekday dummies Dummy variables of weekdays
Holiday dummies Dummy variables for Valentine’s Day and federal holidays
HjDiamond characteristics Dummy coded cut, color and clarity of diamond j,
log- of carat of diamond j,
indicator of carat 1.0 for diamond j
pjtDiamond price Daily price of diamond j(in 1,000)
WjtDaily competitiveness Log of number of diamonds of the same grade
Dominance Hazard ( Djt)
rpjtRelative price index % price diﬀerence between diamond jand its grade-level average
RjtPercentage decoys Number of diamond j’s decoys / number of diamonds in j’s grade
Percentage dominants Number of diamond j’s dominants / number of diamonds in j’s grade
spjtPrice standard deviation Standard deviation of prices in diamond j’s grade on day t
preferences for the 4Cs, diamonds at diﬀerent price levels and grades are likely to have diﬀerent
sale likelihoods. Second, the sale likelihood of a diamond is expected to decrease as the number of
similar diamonds listed increases. Third, because consumers may have diﬀerent purchase intentions
on diﬀerent days, the sale likelihoods of diamonds may also change over time. For example, con-
sumers may have diﬀerent purchase likelihoods on diﬀerent days of a week, or special occasions and
holidays. Accordingly, we model the daily diamond sale hazard  j()as an exponential function
of 1) diamond j’s price segment (dummy coded low-, medium-, or high-price, labeled as Kj); 2)
dummy-coded cut, color, and clarity, log- of carat7(labeled as Hj); 3) its price (labeled as pjt); 4)
log- of the number of diamonds with the same 4Cs (labeled as Wjt); 5) Google search trends to
capture consumer interests, weekday and holiday dummies (labeled as Zt).
WithXjt=fKj;Hj;pjt;Wjt;Ztg, and=fK;H;p;W;Zg, we deﬁne the daily diamond
sale hazard as,
 j(Xjt;) = exp(bj+KjK+HjH+pjtp+WjtW+ZtZ): (2)
We use a random eﬀect speciﬁcation, i.e., exp(bj) (1;2), to allow the intercept term to be
diamond-speciﬁc.8The random coeﬃcient speciﬁcation helps in capturing unobserved correlations
7Since 1.0-carat diamonds are more preferred in our data, in addition to controlling for carat as a continuous
variable, we use an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if diamond j’s carat is equal to 1.0.
8We would like to note that modeling the unobserved heterogeneity beyond the intercept term is not possible in
our setting due to lack of consumer-level panel data. That being said, ignoring price response heterogeneity may
20

in sale likelihoods among diamonds. This is important in our setting since if there exist demand
shocksaﬀectingtwodiamondsatthesametime, withoutsuchspeciﬁcation, theeﬀectofonediamond
on the other one’s demand would likely be inferred with biases. We adopt the Gamma distribution
assumption following Lancaster (1979), where the random eﬀect can be analytically integrated out.
5.2 Dominance Hazard
We capture the DE by our dominance hazard component j(). Per our derivation in Web Appendix
B, a diamond’s sale likelihood further depends on 1) the size of the market segment detecting it to
be a decoy/dominant; and 2) the sale boost upon it is detected as a dominant. We separate these
two parts as the market-level decoy–dominant detection and thedominant boost hazard .
5.2.1 Market-Level Decoy–Dominant Detection
The likelihood of detecting decoys and dominants in the diamond market may depend on various
context-related factors. First of all, it should naturally depend on the decoy–dominant structure in
themarket. Asconsumerstypicallysamplediamondsbasedontheirdesiredgradesusingtheﬁltering
and sorting tools, a diamond with a larger percentage of decoys/dominants in its grade would
have a higher chance of being included together with its decoys/dominants in the consideration
sets. Second, the relative price of a diamond in its grade matters because a diamond is more
likely to stand out either on the top or the bottom of the returned lists under the default price-
sorting design when its absolute relative price diﬀerences get larger. Third, diamond purchases are
unique, ﬁrst-time experiences for most consumers who have limited knowledge regarding diamond
pricing. Thus, learning about the prices becomes an inherent part of their decision process. A
greater variation in the prices of comparable diamonds indicates more opportunities to save, which
will likely motivate consumers to spend more time on the retailer’s site searching and comparing
alternatives. Consequently, they would be more likely to detect existing decoy–dominant relations.
As such, we expect the grade-level price dispersion to be another moderator of dominance detection.
cause overestimation of the DE’s magnitude if there is selection in the market where more price-sensitive consumers
enter into the market only when the market prices are low (see Bell and Lattin (2000) for the overestimation of the
magnitude of loss aversion in the absence of controlling price response heterogeneity). This type of selection might be
less an issue in our particular setting because a diamond is a one-time purchase product category in which consumers
are less likely to have well-formed reference prices from past experiences. In addition, the average price within each
grade stays almost constant week-over-week, making it less likely for the retailer to attract a substantially diﬀerent
consumer segment (i.e., more price-sensitive) on a weekly basis.
21

Based on the above rationales, we model the market-level decoy–dominant detection part of our
dominance hazard as a function of the following variables: 1) percentages of decoys and dominants
that diamond jhas (RDecoy
jtandRDominant
jt), 2) the relative price measurement ( rpjt), and 3) the
price standard deviation in diamond j’s grade (spjt).
We denote the market-level decoy and dominant detection probabilities asPrDecoy
jt ()and
PrDominant
jt (), respectively. Given Djt=fKj;RDecoy
jt;RDominant
jt;rpjt;spjtg, we model these two
terms as the following:
PrDominant
jt (Djt;) =I(NDecoy
jt>0)exp(VDominant
jt )
1 + exp(VDominant
jt )
PrDecoy
jt (Djt;) =I(NDominant
jt>0)exp(VDecoy
jt )
1 + exp(VDecoy
jt ); (3)
whereI()is the indicator function and VDominant
jt andVDecoy
jtare speciﬁed as:
VDominant
jt =KjDominant
0 +Dominant
1 ln(RDecoy
jt ) +Dominant
2I(rpjt<0)( rpjt) +Dominant
3spjt
VDecoy
jt =KjDecoy
0 +Decoy
1 ln(RDominant
jt ) +Decoy
2I(rpjt>0)(rpjt) +Decoy
3spjt:
(4)
The intercept terms ( Dominant
0 andDecoy
0) are modeled at each of the diamond price segments
since decoy–dominant detection probabilities deﬁned in Equation (3) might diﬀer across various
marketsegmentswithdiﬀerentconsumerbudgetarylevels. Theother scapturehowthepercentage
measures of decoys/dominants, the relative price, and standard deviation of the grade-level prices
would impact the decoy–dominant detection probabilities.
5.2.2 Dominant Boost Hazard
Upon a diamond being detected as a dominant, the size of the boost in its sale likelihood, i.e., the
DE, may also depend on a few important context-related factors. First, all else equal, dominants
with more decoys are likely to become more attractive (DE is also called attraction eﬀect) compared
to diamonds with fewer decoys, especially when consumers engage in multiple comparisons. Second,
basedontheprospecttheory(Kahneman,1979), aconsumer’spurchasedecisiondependsonwhether
the price paid is perceived as fair with respect to her reference price point. Since diamonds are not
repeat-purchase products, a consumer is expected to form her reference price based on the prices
22

of available diamonds rather than the past price histories (Mazumdar et al., 2005). Thus, upon
detection of a dominant, we expect its sale likelihood to increase as the size of the price gain
relative to comparable diamonds increases. Lastly, following our discussion on consumer learning
in dominance detection, we expect consumers to spend less time as the variation of the grade-level
prices decreases. Accordingly, we expect that with a smaller price dispersion, consumers become
more likely to settle down with their detected dominants rather than continuing the search for other
diamonds. As such, we expect the sale boost of a detected dominant to be more substantial as the
within-grade price variation decreases. Given these rationales, we include the same set of variables
as in the dominance detection component. We label Djt=fKj;RDecoy
jt;RDominant
jt;rpjt;spjtg, and
deﬁne the dominant boost hazard Qjtas follows:
Qjt(Djt;) = exph
KjBoost
0 +Boost
1 ln(RDecoy
jt ) +Boost
2I(rpjt<0)( rpjt) +Boost
3spjti
:(5)
Similar to the intercept term of the market-level decoy–dominant detection probabilities, we
model the intercept term (Boost
0 )at each of the diamond price segments since the dominant boost
sizes might diﬀer across market segments. The other s capture how the percentage measures of
decoys/dominants, the relative price, and standard deviation of the grade-level prices would impact
the sales boost upon dominant detection.
Given market-level detection probabilities and dominant boost hazard speciﬁcations, we opera-
tionalize the dominance hazard as follows:
j(tj) =8
>>>>>><
>>>>>>:1 ifjisNeither
(1 PrDecoy
jt ) ifjisDecoy Only
(1 PrDominant
jt ) +PrDominant
jtQjt ifjisDominant Only
(1 PrDecoy
jt )h
(1 PrDominant
jt ) +PrDominant
jtQjti
ifjisBoth:(6)
We would like to note that we make an implicit assumption in the derivation of the dominance
hazard in Equation (6). We assume that once a consumer detects a speciﬁc diamond to be a
decoy, she would never purchase it, as she can always choose the dominant one. This assumption is
consistent with the existing literature. For example, Huber et al. (1982) veriﬁed that fully informed
subjects would seldom make “mistakes” of choosing decoys in lab experiments. We argue that it
is highly unlikely for a consumer to buy a detected decoy diamond given that diamonds are high
ticket item products and the monetary cost of doing so is signiﬁcant.
23

Equation (6) shows how the dominance hazard depends on a diamond’s type: if it is neither
decoy nor dominant , the DE has no impact on the sale hazard of the diamond, i.e., the dominance
hazard is normalized to one. If the diamond is decoy only type, it is considered only by the consumer
segment that fails to detect it as a decoy under our assumption. Further, the DE does not play a
role in the sale hazard of the diamond given no detection, resulting in the overall dominance hazard
being the size of this segment, i.e., j() = 1 PrDecoy
jt (). For adominant only type diamond, there
exist two market segments: the segment that fails to detect the diamond as a dominant, and the
segment that is able to. The DE does not have any impact on the former segment (i.e., Qjt() = 1),
while we expect a boost in sale hazard (i.e., Qjt()>1) for the latter. The overall sale hazard thus
becomes the expression in the third line of Equation (6). Finally, if the diamond is a both decoy
and dominant type, it is considered for purchase only by the consumer segment that fails to detect
it as a decoy, with the size of the segment being 1 PrDecoy
jt (). Similar to the decoy only case, the
remaining consumer segment never purchases it, i.e., Qjt() = 0. The segment that fails to detect
the diamond as a decoy can be divided into two sub-segments: the sub-segment that fails to detect
the diamond as a dominant and the one that is able to do so. Similar to the dominant only case,
the former sub-segment with size 1 PrDominant
jt ()will not be impacted by DE, i.e., Qjt() = 1,
while the sale hazard from the other sub-segment will be boosted by Qjt()>1. Combining all the
scenarios, for the dominance hazard, we have the expression in the last line of Equation (6).
5.3 Model Estimation
Based on the model components outlined above, we can further arrange the terms and derive the
following log-hazard representation (see Web Appendix C for details),
lnhj(t) =bj+Xjt|{z}
daily diamond sale hazard I(Decoy ) ln(1 +eDDecoy
jtDecoy)| {z }
dominance hazard of a decoy
+I(Dominant )h
ln(1 +eDDominant
jt(Dominant+Boost)) ln(1 +eDDominant
jtDominant)i
| {z }
dominance hazard of a dominant;(7)
whereDDecoy
jt =fKj;lnRDominant
jt;I(rpjt>0)rpjt;spjtgandDDominant
jt =fKj;lnRDecoys
jt;I(rpjt<
0)( rpjt);spjtg. The eﬀects of being a decoy and being a dominant on the sale hazards are clearly
outlined in the last two terms of this representation.
24

Denote the total number of days since diamond j(in totalJdiamonds) is on the market to
the end of our observation period as Tj, and the day diamond jis sold since its introduction as
Ts
j. Following the derivation in Lancaster (1979) for the random eﬀect hazard model, the total
likelihood we use for estimation becomes the following:
L=JY
j=1
I 
Ts
jTj 
Sj(Ts
j 1) Sj(Ts
j)

I 
Ts
j>Tj
Sj(Ts
j)	
; (8)
whereSj(t) =
1 +2Pt
=1hj()  2
is the survivor function and hj()is the mean value of the
hazardhj()wherebj= 0. Notice that lim2!0Sj(t) =Qt
=1e hj(), i.e., it reduces to the case
without random eﬀects. We estimate the model by using the maximum likelihood approach.
We now discuss a few properties of our model. First, the unit of our analysis is each diamond,
which is diﬀerent from classic choice models. Second, in terms of how to model the DE conditional
on dominant detection, we choose to use a scalar function Qjt(). WhenQjt()>1, our speciﬁcation
becomes consistent with the DE theory, i.e., upon detection, there is a boost in sales for dominant
diamonds. In other words, under our framework, testing the existence of the DE becomes the same
as testing whether Qjt()>1. Details of this test are provided in Web Appendix B. Third, it is
quite possible that consumers are heterogeneous, so we allow our daily diamond sale hazard  j()
and the dominance hazard j()to diﬀer across diﬀerent diamond price segments.
5.4 Model Identiﬁcation
Our identiﬁcation strategy relies on the fact that it takes diﬀerent numbers of days to sell diﬀerent
types of diamonds ( neither decoy nor dominant, decoy only, dominant only , orboth decoy and
dominant ); or equivalently, the sale hazards vary across diﬀerent diamond types. Accordingly, we
use diﬀerent parts of the data to identify diﬀerent components of our speciﬁcation. First, based on
the normalization in the ﬁrst line of Equation (6), the sale hazard for the neithertype equals to the
daily diamond sale hazard. Thus, we use the portion of the data regarding the sales of neithertype
diamondswithdiﬀerent Kj,Hj,Wjt, andZtinXjttoidentifytheparameters inthedailydiamond
sale hazard component. Second, conditional on the identiﬁcation of , we identify the parameters
related to the detection probabilities and dominant boost hazard. Since decoy diamonds could only
be purchased by the market segment that fails to detect them as decoys (see the second line of
25

Equation (6)), we use portion of the data regarding the sales of decoy only diamonds with diﬀerent
RDominant
jt,rpjt, andspjtinDjtto identify the parameters of the market-level decoy detection
probabilities, i.e., Decoy(alsoseethesecondcomponentofEquation(7)). Third, asseeninthethird
andfourthlinesofEquation(6),itisnotpossibletoseparatelyidentifytheparametersofthemarket-
level dominant detection probabilities ( Dominant) and of the dominant boost hazard ( Boost) since
PrDominant
jt andQjtarealwaysbundledtogetherintheformof (1 PrDominant
jt )+PrDominant
jtQjt. To
separately identify DominantfromBoost, we make the following assumption: Decoy=Dominant,
i.e., all else equal, the market-level probability of detecting a diamond with ndecoys as a dominant
is identical to the probability of detecting a diamond in the same grade with ndominants as a decoy.
Since the decoy–dominant relationships are calibrated at the diamond-pair level, the probability of
discovering one diamond dominating another is the ﬂip side of discovering that one is dominated
by the other. Thus, it is reasonable to assume parameters quantifying the decoy and dominant
detection probabilities in the diamond market to be the same.9
Based on this symmetric market-level detection assumption, and conditional on the dominant
detection parameters ( Dominant) being identiﬁed, we use portion of the data regarding the sales
ofdominant only andboth decoy and dominant type diamonds with diﬀerent Djtto identify the
parametersofthe dominant boost hazard ,Boost. Inourempiricalsetting, thediamondpriceschange
over days and subsequently the decoy–dominant structure also changes daily. This data variation
empowers the identiﬁcation of our model parameters ( ,Decoy, andBoost). Finally, variation in
the time it takes to sell diamonds with similar XjtandDjtenables identiﬁcation of the unobserved
heterogeneity parameter (i.e., 2).
In addition, the identiﬁcation of the parameters relies on our exclusion restrictions. Speciﬁcally,
we observe two types of variables in the data–the ones that are directly observable by consumers
(such as diamond physical attributes and daily demand factors, i.e., Xjt), and the ones that require
extensive consumer search and comparisons (i.e., the context-related variables, Djt). The Daily
Diamond Sale Hazard component captures the baseline sale hazard of a diamond that does not
depend on deliberate diamond comparisons. Hence, we exclude context-related variables ( Djt)
in the modeling of this component. In contrast, the Dominance Hazard component captures the
9Our data limit us from testing whether they are empirically equal. Web browsing information from individual
consumers would potentially help construct measurements to test this. Due to the stringent data requirement, we
leave this exercise for future research.
26

critical impact of potential context eﬀect under study. Accordingly, we exclude the variables that
are directly observable to consumers without extensive search ( Xjt).10
Finally, given that the derived log-hazard speciﬁcation is highly non-linear, a valid concern is
whether various components in the function can be identiﬁed accurately. We conﬁrm that our
statistical test of dominance is valid through Monte Carlo simulations (see details in Web Appendix
D). We simulate diamond sales by using the proposed model speciﬁcation under various detection
and dominant boost levels. Estimation with these simulated datasets yields that we can correctly
recover the assumed parameters with high precision. Further, we show that the dominance hazard
component is not identiﬁable without the existence of the dominance eﬀect in the simulated data,
assuring that the quantiﬁed DE is not an artifact of the speciﬁc non-linear functional form.
6 Results
6.1 Main Estimation Results
We report our estimation results in Table 6. Results suggest that the daily diamond sale hazard
increases with the diamond’s carat size. In addition, 1.0-carat diamonds are signiﬁcantly easier to
sell. As expected, as a diamond’s price increases, its sale hazard decreases. Regarding the cut, color,
andclarityattributes, weobserveaninverseU-shaperelationship, i.e., thedailydiamondsalehazard
is the largest for diamonds with moderate cut, color and clarity levels.11Estimates of daily demand
proxies suggest that Google search indexes for diamond-related keywords are signiﬁcant proxies for
the sales. The daily diamond sale hazard increases signiﬁcantly when the search indexes on the
keywords of “engagement ring” and the studied retailer’s name are high, whereas it decreases when
the search intensity is high on the keywords of “diamond,” “diamond ring,” and the competitor’s
name. The daily diamond sale hazard also diﬀers signiﬁcantly across weekdays, with Thursday
10It might be possible that some context-related variables such as the relative price and the price variation could
directly aﬀect choice instead of the DE as we operationalize. Similarly, it is possible that diamond physical attributes
could also moderate the extent of the DE. We conduct robustness checks that a) include relative price and price
variation in the baseline component and b) move diamond 4C attributes to the dominance hazard component. Our
main model speciﬁcation in the paper generally outperforms these alternative speciﬁcations based on the AIC. More
importantly, the quantiﬁed detection probabilities and DE remain quantitatively similar as compared to our main
model speciﬁcation. Details are available upon request.
11As previously mentioned, our unit of analysis is each individual diamond; thus the basic sale hazard would be
determined by both consumer demand for and supply-level of diamonds. Therefore, an inverse U-shape relationship
does not imply that given the same price, a consumer does not prefer diamonds with better physical attributes.
27

being the best day for diamond sales, while Saturday and Sunday are the worst days. The results
also suggest that diamonds are easier to sell during holidays. Regarding the competition from other
diamonds, we ﬁnd that, intuitively, as the number of same-grade diamonds increases, the daily sale
hazard decreases. Lastly, the estimated variance of the random eﬀect is reasonably large, i.e., the
standard deviation is around 27% of the intercepts, highlighting the importance of controlling for
unobserved correlations in the sale likelihoods among diamonds.
Table 6: Model Estimates
Variable Estimate S.E.
Daily Diamond Sale Hazard
Low-Price Segment (2K–5K)  3:349**0:114
Medium-Price Segment (5K–10K)  3:169**0:121
High-Price Segment (10K–20K)  3:312**0:131
ln(Carat) 0:462**0:079
Is 1.0 Carat 0:542**0:018
Price (in 1000)  0:057**0:006
Cut: Poor 0:000
Cut: Good 0:325**0:096
Cut: Very Good 0:835**0:095
Cut: Ideal 1:227**0:094
Cut: Signature Ideal 0:431**0:127
Color: J 0:000
Color: I 0:075**0:029
Color: H 0:228**0:030
Color: G 0:248**0:031
Color: F 0:299**0:032
Color: E 0:065*0:035
Color: D 0:046 0 :039
Clarity: SI2 0:000
Clarity: SI1 0:166**0:023
Clarity: VS2 0:310**0:025
Clarity: VS1 0:248**0:027
Clarity: VVS2 0:078**0:031
Clarity: VVS1  0:112**0:036
Clarity: IF  0:564**0:044
Clarity: FL  0:300 0 :415
Google Search: “diamond”  0:205*0:110
Google Search: “diamond ring”  0:527**0:065
Google Search: “wedding ring”  0:003 0 :057
Google Search: “engagement ring” 0:079**0:031
Google Search: retailer’s name 0:183**0:020
Google Search: competitor’s name  0:446**0:064
Weekday: Monday 0:000
Weekday: Tuesday  0:026*0:014
Weekday: Wednesday  0:053**0:014
Weekday: Thursday 0:052**0:014
Continued on next page
28

Table 6: Model Estimates
Variable Estimate S.E.
Weekday: Friday  0:186**0:015
Weekday: Saturday  1:737**0:026
Weekday: Sunday  1:158**0:021
Is Holiday 0:033**0:013
ln(# Diamonds of the Same Grade)  0:026**0:011
2(Variance of the Random Eﬀect) 0:787**0:012
Dominance Hazard—Market-Level Detection Probability
Low-Price Segment (2K–5K)  1:341**0:114
Medium-Price Segment (5K–10K)  1:850**0:190
High-Price Segment (10K–20K)  2:430**0:388
ln(RDominant
jt ) 0 :241**0:041
I(rpjt>0)(rpjt) 1 :816**0:734
spjt 0:265*0:151
Dominance Hazard—Dominant Boost Hazard
Low-Price Segment (2K–5K) 0:965**0:090
Medium-Price Segment (5K–10K) 0:552**0:155
High-Price Segment (10K–20K) 1:072**0:305
ln(RDecoy
jt ) 0 :072**0:027
I(rpjt<0)( rpjt) 1 :227**0:496
spjt 0:087 0 :082
Log-likelihood  257;666
AIC 515;432
Note:Estimates withandare signiﬁcant at the 0.05 and 0.10 levels, respectively.
We now discuss the estimation results regarding the market-level decoy–dominant detection prob-
abilities and thedominant boost hazard , which are the most critical components of our model for
addressing the paper’s central research questions. First, our results suggest that the base market-
level detection probability of a decoy (or dominant) diamond is the highest for diamonds in the
low-price segment and the lowest in the high-price segment. One potential explanation is that con-
sumers of the low-price ($2K–$5K) segment are usually on tight budgets and are more motivated to
spend extra time searching for better prices, leading to larger consideration sets. As a result, they
are more likely to detect existing decoy–dominant relationships. The positive signiﬁcant estimate
of (log- of) grade-level percentage of decoys/dominants (0.241) shows that when a larger percent-
age of diamonds are decoys in a diamond’s grade, it gets relatively easier for the market to detect
that diamond as a dominant. The positive signiﬁcant estimate of the relative price index (1.816)
shows that the further a decoy/dominant diamond is priced from the average grade-level price, the
higher is the probability of decoy/dominant detection in the diamond market. In addition, results
29

suggest that as the price variation increases in a grade, the market-level detection probabilities of
decoys/dominants marginally increase. This ﬁnding suggests that as the within-grade price varia-
tion gets larger, consumers search more to identify decoys (and dominants). By using our model
estimates, we next calculate the market-level decoy–dominant detection probabilities. Interestingly,
we ﬁnd that these probabilities are quite low: 0.25 for the low-, 0.17 for the medium-, and 0.11
for the high-price segments. These ﬁndings show that our real-life scenario with a large number of
diamonds deﬁned on 4Cs and price with many decoys and dominants greatly contrasts with usual
lab settings, in which participants are almost always aware of the decoy–dominant relationships.
Second, the intercept estimates of our dominant boost hazard component are all positive, con-
ﬁrmingthat, upondominantdetection, thesalehazardwouldbesigniﬁcantlyboosted. Thisprovides
direct and conclusive evidence of the existence of the DE in a real product market. The demand
boost eﬀect is lower for the medium-price segment (0.552) compared to the low- (0.965) and high-
price (1.072) segments. The parameter estimate for the (log- of) percentage of decoys is positive
and signiﬁcant (0.072), indicating that having more decoys would increase the dominant diamonds’
sale hazards. The relative price measure is also positive and signiﬁcant (1.227) suggesting that
as a dominant is discounted further away from the grade-level average price, its sale likelihood is
boosted more. The estimate of the grade-level price dispersion turns out to be insigniﬁcant. We
next calculate the average dominant boost eﬀect in proportional terms using the estimates. We
ﬁnd that, conditional on a diamond being detected as a dominant, its sale hazard increases by 2.7
times for the low-, 1.8 times for the medium-, and 3.2 times for the high-price segments, suggesting
that—due to the DE—there is a substantial boost in the sale hazards of dominant diamonds.
In summary, our estimation results show that in general, consumers have a low chance of detect-
ing the decoy–dominant relationships in the online diamond market, especially among diamonds in
the high-price segment. Thus, it is critical to model the decoy–dominant detection process in real
product markets in order to correctly quantify the sales impacts of decoys on dominants. On the
other hand, even though the market-level decoy–dominant detection probabilities are low, once an
alternative is detected as a dominant, its sale hazard increases quite signiﬁcantly, especially in the
low- and high-price segments. With this ﬁnding, we not only provide strong ﬁeld evidence about
the existence of the DE, but also respond to Frederick et al. (2014) and Yang and Lynn (2014), who
questioned the practical validity and usefulness of the DE.
30

6.2 Model Comparison and Robustness
In addition to our main model estimation, we conduct comparisons with two simpler modeling
approaches and check the robustness of the results with three alternative speciﬁcations. We show
that one would obtain worse data ﬁts and biased inferences of the DE under these alternative
approaches. We also conﬁrm that the estimates are very robust under alternative speciﬁcations
with other ways of heterogeneity control and diﬀerent speciﬁcations of the reference price.
One important modeling contribution of this paper is the separation of the DE from decoy–
dominant detection. To test the importance of this separation, in our ﬁrst model comparison, we
estimate a benchmark proportional hazard model by including the same set of controls directly in
the baseline hazard. Speciﬁcally, the log-hazard speciﬁcation in Equation (7) becomes the following:
ln(hj(t)) =bj+Xjt+DDecoy
jtDecoy+DDominant
jtDominant: (9)
The second column of Table 7 (column “No Detection”) reports the estimates of the dominance
variables for decoys (decoy shrinkage hazard) and dominants (dominant boost hazard). This sim-
ple modeling approach is outperformed by our proposed model based on the AIC, suggesting that
explicitly separating the market–level decoy–dominant detection from the dominant boost hazard
better explains data variation. More importantly, the alternative model’s estimates have a com-
pound eﬀect of detection and boost on diamonds’ sale hazards, causing inaccurate inferences in
understanding the magnitude of the DE if one directly uses these estimates. Results suggest that
dominantboosthazardsfromthisbenchmarkmodelaremuchsmaller(rangingfrom1.1to1.4times)
compared to ones from the proposed model (1.8 to 3.2 times). Thus, not explicitly controlling for
the market-level detection causes a signiﬁcant under-estimation of the DE’s magnitude.
One potential explanation for the observed sales patterns is heterogeneous competitive eﬀects.
For example, there could exist two diamond segments with diﬀerent competition intensities where
diamonds in the ﬁrst segment are minimally aﬀected by competition while those in the second are
highly aﬀected. Further, the likelihood of being in the second segment depends on a diamond’s rel-
ative price in the grade. Accordingly, if a dominant diamond is priced signiﬁcantly lower than other
similar diamonds, the competitive eﬀect plays a role implying a boost in the diamond’s sale likeli-
31

hood, and vice-versa .12To test this alternative explanation, we use a simple 2-segment latent-class
model with diamond price segment dummies and absolute relative price diﬀerences determining the
competitive segment membership, and a competition hazard (conditional on being in the compet-
itive segment) that is modeled by the (log- of) number of competing diamonds in the same grade.
This speciﬁcation yields a much higher AIC compared to our proposed speciﬁcation (516,718 vs.
515,432), strongly supporting the DE over the heterogeneous competitive eﬀects explanation.
Table 7: Model Comparisons and Robustness Checks
Variable No Detection Homogeneous Reference Price Fixed Eﬀect
Diamond Random Eﬀects included included included
Day Fixed Eﬀects included
PGain:I(rpjt<0)rpjt  1:251**(0:209)
PLoss:I(rpjt>0)rpjt  0:599**(0:222)
Market-Level Detection Probability/Decoy Shrinkage Hazard
Low-Price Segment  0:245**(0:025) 1:548**(0:110) 1:376**(0:120) 1:578**(0:145)
Medium-Price Segment  0:090**(0:029) 2:048**(0:208) 1:993**(0:217) 1:742**(0:156)
High-Price Segment  0:095**(0:037) 3:205**(0:413) 2:388**(0:433) 2:176**(0:265)
ln(RDominant
jt )  0:044**(0:008) 0:205**(0:047) 0 :243**(0:041) 0 :293**(0:045)
I(rpjt>0)(rpjt) 0:621**(0:198) 1:164 (0:836) 0 :752 (0:829)
spjt  0:046 (0:029) 0:587**(0:141) 0 :261 (0:167) 0 :304**(0:140)
Dominant Boost Hazard
Low-Price Segment 0:314**(0:027) 0:720**(0:089) 0 :989**(0:092) 1 :118**(0:114)
Medium-Price Segment 0:050*(0:029) 0:415**(0:168) 0 :493**(0:173) 0 :416**(0:130)
High-Price Segment 0:064*(0:033) 1:446**(0:334) 0 :941**(0:321) 0 :722**(0:202)
ln(RDecoy
jt ) 0 :076**(0:007) 0:040 (0:027) 0 :078**(0:027) 0 :027 (0:030)
I(rpjt<0)( rpjt) 1 :237**(0:220) 0:910*(0:508) 1 :768**(0:560)
spjt 0:088**(0:028) 0:010 (0:085) 0 :095 (0:089) 0 :107**(0:007)
N. parameters 50 49 50 247
Log-likelihood  257;679 262;156 257;669 254;071
AIC 515;458 524 ;410 515 ;438 508 ;636
Note:Numbers reported are mean estimates and standard errors. Estimates withandare signiﬁcant at
the 0.05 and 0.10 levels, respectively. Other controls (diamond 4Cs, competition, etc.) are included in
the models but not reported here to save space.
We also conduct a series of robustness checks with alternative model speciﬁcations and report
the results in Table 7. The ﬁrst speciﬁcation omits the random eﬀect in the hazard speciﬁcation
(column “Homogeneous”), the second adopts a RPE speciﬁcation with the relative price variables
entering into the daily diamond sale hazard component instead of our dominance hazard speciﬁ-
cation (column “Reference Price”), and the last speciﬁcation includes day ﬁxed eﬀects instead of
12We thank the Associate Editor for pointing out this. Due to the aggregate nature of our data, it is not possible
to identify the segment-speciﬁc log-hazards and the segment sizes simultaneously. Thus, for identiﬁcation purposes,
we normalize the hazard for diamonds in the ﬁrst segment to one, which represents no competitive eﬀect.
32

Google search indexes and weekday dummies as the control for demand eﬀects across days (column
“Fixed Eﬀect”). Across these three speciﬁcations, we ﬁnd consistent and robust results: most of the
estimates have the same direction and similar magnitude as in our main model. One notable diﬀer-
ence is that the relative magnitude of the DE is reversed for the low- and high- price segments under
the homogeneous model. We believe our random eﬀect speciﬁcation captures more unobserved het-
erogeneity across diamonds and thus should be more accurate, with the log-likelihood also much
improved. The change in moving the relative price variables into the diamond daily hazard compo-
nent seems to make little impact on the model estimates. In addition, the estimates again show that
the sales function is more responsive in the gain domain than in the loss domain, consistent with
the ﬁndings in our data pattern explorations. Finally, including day ﬁxed eﬀects could improve the
model ﬁt but it comes at the cost of almost 200 additional parameters. Importantly, the coeﬃcient
estimates for the dominance hazard component remain almost the same. Thus, we prefer our main
model speciﬁcation for being parsimonious.
7 Managerial Signiﬁcance
We now explore the managerial implications of our study. We ﬁrst quantify the DE’s overall proﬁt
impact to the retailer using model estimates. We also explore through simulation studies how sen-
sitive the DE’s proﬁt impact is with respect to changes in diﬀerent aspects of dominance structure.
These exercises shed new light on the DE’s practical signiﬁcance showing that it is not simply an
experimental artifact.
To quantify the DE’s proﬁt impact, we start with the retailer’s proﬁt for a given diamond jat
timetthat can be calculated as:
jt=Prj(tj)(pjt wjt); (10)
wherepjtis the price, and wjtis the wholesale price, which can be easily calculated by subtracting
out the retailer’s mark-up of 18% (provided in retailer’s annual report) from the observed daily retail
prices. Prj(tj) = 1 exp( hj(tj))is the discrete-time hazard, or the probability that diamond j
would be sold on day t, conditional on not being sold until that day. The DE’s impact on proﬁt can
be quantiﬁed by calculating the diﬀerences in the sale probability Prj(tj)with and without setting
33

the dominant boost hazard component Qjt()to 1.
We present the results in Table 8. Without the DE, on average, each diamond contributes $22.89
in gross proﬁt each day; whereas with the DE, the contribution becomes $26.16. The DE increases
the retailer’s overall gross proﬁt by 14.3%, or equivalently, the DE contributes a 12.5% share of
the retailer’s gross proﬁt. The proﬁt increase due to the DE is the largest in the low-price segment
(25.4%), whereas the opposite is the case in the medium-price segment (8.6%). Based on the
ﬁnancial information of the retailer, this percentage increase would translate into an annual proﬁt
increase of $9 million. This result shows that even though decoy–dominant detection probabilities
are low in the online diamond market, the DE still has a substantial proﬁt impact due to the
signiﬁcant boost in sale likelihoods upon dominance detection. Indeed, this proﬁt impact is what
matters the most from the substantive point of view.
Table 8: The Impact of the DE on Retailer’s Gross Proﬁt
Eﬀect 2K–5K 5K–10K 10K–20K Overall
Avg Daily Proﬁt Per Diamond W/O the DE 8:71 30 :17 43 :67 22 :89
Avg Daily Proﬁt Per Diamond W/ the DE 10:92 32 :76 49 :72 26 :16
% Proﬁt Increase due to the DE 25:37% 8:58% 13:85% 14:29%
We next investigate the sensitivity of the DE’s proﬁt impact to diﬀerent dominance conﬁgura-
tions in the diamond market. In the simulation studies, we implement changes in the dominance
structure within the range of observed data. In the ﬁrst simulation study, we check how the DE’s
proﬁt impact changes when each existing decoy/dominant diamond has one more decoy and/or
dominant in the market. Results are presented in the top portion of Table 9. We ﬁnd that, intu-
itively, having one more decoy would increase the DE’s proﬁt impact by 0.37% due to the eﬀect of
decoys in boosting the sales of dominants. Whereas, when one more dominant is added, the DE’s
proﬁt impact decreases by 0.24% because the decoy detection probability would increase leading
to a decrease of sales from the decoys. The DE’s proﬁt impact slightly increases (0.14%) if each
decoy/dominant diamond has one more decoy and one more dominant.
We examine the eﬀect of price dispersion on the DE’s proﬁt impact in the second simulation
study. Speciﬁcally, weenlargeorshrinktherelativepricesofeachdiamondbyafactor. Forexample,
think about a diamond that is priced at $11,000, with a calculated mean grade price of $10,000. By
preserving the mean price level, we change the price of this diamond to $10,500 (dispersion factor
34

Table 9: Percentage Changes in the DE’s Proﬁt Impact as the Dominance Structure Changes
2K–5K 5K–10K 10K–20K Overall
Changing the Number of Decoys/Dominants
Each Diamond Has 1 More Decoy 0:43% 0:25% 0:39% 0:37%
Each Diamond Has 1 More Dominant  0:26% 0:25% 0:17% 0:24%
Each Diamond Has 1 More Decoy and Dominant 0:16% 0:01% 0:22% 0:14%
Changing the Price Variation
Multiplying the Dispersion by 0.5  0:52% 0:28% 1:08% 0:60%
Multiplying the Dispersion by 0.8  0:19% 0:10% 0:44% 0:23%
Multiplying the Dispersion by 1.2 0:17% 0:10% 0:46% 0:22%
Multiplying the Dispersion by 1.5 0:37% 0:22% 1:17% 0:53%
Changing the Market-Level Detection Probabilities
Market-level Detection Probability in the Data 0:25 0:17 0 :11 0 :19
Market-level Detection Probability of 0.05  3:36% 1:49% 2:51% 1:41%
Market-level Detection Probability of 0.10  1:71% 0:99% 0:25% 0:01%
Market-level Detection Probability of 0.20  0:13% 0:78% 2:45% 1:00%
Market-level Detection Probability of 0.30  0:45% 4:03% 2:98% 0:04%
Market-level Detection Probability of 0.40  2:28% 7:65% 1:66% 2:40%
0.5), $10,800 (dispersion factor 0.8), $11,200 (dispersion factor 1.2), and $11,500 (dispersion factor
1.5) in our simulation study. The middle portion of Table 9 reports the results of this simulation
study. Results suggest that the DE’s proﬁt impact increases with the increase in price dispersion
(between the dispersion factor of 0.5 and 1.5). Based on our model estimates, an expanded price
dispersion would increase both the detection probabilities of decoys/dominants and the eﬀect of
demand boost on dominants. The proﬁt gains from dominants (due to higher detection and sales
boost) outperform the losses from decoy sales (due to higher detection), leading to an increase in
the retailer’s proﬁt in the studied dispersion range.13
Given that dominance detection is a critical pre-condition for the DE, we evaluate the proﬁt
impact of the DE under diﬀerent dominance detection levels in our last simulation study. By
changing the intercepts in the detection equation, we set the market-level detection probabilities
at 5%, 10%, 20%, 30%, and 40%. The detection probabilities are between 25% for the low-price
segment and 11% for the high-price segment in the data. Results reported in the bottom portion
of Table 9 suggest that the DE’s proﬁt impact gets larger when the detection probability is lower
in the medium-price segment and higher in the high-price segment, as compared to the current
levels. On the other hand, the DE’s proﬁt impact is highest around the current detection level in
13Additional analyses reveal that as the dispersion levels further increase to a few times, the DE’s proﬁt impact
levels oﬀ, and the retailer’s proﬁt start to decrease due to the DE.
35

the low-price segment. These patterns are driven by the fact that dominance detection has opposite
impacts on the proﬁts from decoys versus dominants. Thus, the DE’s proﬁt impact varies based on
the detection levels and the magnitude of the DE across the diamond price segments.
In summary, our study oﬀers a framework to guide marketing researchers about how to quantify
decoy–dominant detection probabilities in real product markets with pricing and sales information.
We show that the DE has a substantial impact on the studied retailer’s proﬁtability. Further, we
ﬁnd that the retailer could potentially gain additional proﬁts from the DE when 1) there are more
decoys in the market, 2) within-grade price variation increases, and 3) dominance detection proba-
bilities stay similar, decrease, and increase in the low-, medium-, and high-price diamond segments,
respectively. Having a better understanding of the proﬁt impact could enable the retailer to more
eﬀectively utilize the DE in its marketing and operations activities. One interesting observation is
that the retailer recently included a new section of comparable alternatives on the details pages of a
selected list of diamonds, in which their decoys/dominants are displayed for some of the diamonds.
This practice could likely change the chances of consumers detecting decoys and dominants.
8 Conclusions
In this research, we empirically validate the DE by using unique panel data from a leading online
jewelry retailer. We estimate a proportional hazard model (derived from consumer primitives) with
embedded market-level decoy–dominant detection probabilities and the sales boost upon dominant
detection (i.e., the DE). We ﬁnd that, the market-level probability of detecting decoys or dominants
is quite low (11%–25%). However, upon a dominant is detected, its sale hazard increases by 1.8 to
3.2 times. Thus, we empirically validate the existence of the DE in a real product market. Our
model comparisons reveal that not controlling for decoy–dominant detection yields biased inferences
regarding the DE’s magnitude. We show that our estimates are robust under various alternative
speciﬁcations. In addition to validating the DE in the ﬁeld, we contribute to the substantive issue
of measuring the DE’s proﬁt impact, i.e., the DE’s managerial signiﬁcance. We quantify the proﬁt
impact of the DE using model estimates and ﬁnd that it improves the retailer’s gross proﬁt by
14.3%. We explore how sensitive this proﬁt impact is with respect to changes in the dominance
structure, and ﬁnd that the proﬁt impact could potentially increase with more decoys, a larger price
36

variation, and changes in the market-level decoy–dominant detection probabilities.
Our study is the ﬁrst empirical attempt to quantify the widely documented DE in the consumer
behavior literature. It is exciting to apply the well-developed context-dependent choice theory to
real-life data and empirically quantify the managerial implications. Accordingly, we would like to
note that the studied online diamond market is a unique setting to test the DE since diamonds have
vertical attributes, and decoys and dominants are widely observed. That being said, we believe it is
possible to ﬁnd other market settings that also allow the DE to be tested. For example, it is com-
mon that multiple sellers carry diﬀerent price stickers when selling identical products with the same
shipping/return policies and warranties in e-commerce platforms such as Amazon where the more
expensive alternatives serve the role of decoys. Similarly, in used-goods platforms such as eBay, it
is often possible to observe products with inferior conditions from low-rating sellers to be more ex-
pensive than some of the better condition ones from top sellers. These decoy alternatives may boost
the sale likelihood of less expensive and/or better condition dominants. Further, to substantiate the
eﬀect of such decoys on their dominants, these retail platforms can make decoy–dominant detection
easier or more diﬃcult by either changing the order of the product listings or recommending the
products of particular sellers. However, such operations may have practical limitations for platform
designers due to creating equality concerns and discouraging the participation of smaller sellers. In
addition to within-product price variation on retail platforms, some producers price their product
bundles the same as their main product to make the bundle more attractive. For example, Dyson
oﬀers the V11 Torque Drive Cord-Free Vacuum with extra Extension Hose at the same price as
the Vacuum itself. Last, as opposed to these strict decoy examples, retailers may position some
products as near decoys. For example, the price diﬀerence between iPhone X 512GB and 256GB
is the same as the diﬀerence between the 256GB and 64GB, making upgrading to 512GB more
attractive to some consumers. In the future, quantifying the DE across various product categories
might help researchers to better understand the DE’s limits and boundaries.
We believe there are multiple dimensions that can be pursued to extend understanding of the
DE in future research. One direction is to investigate how consumers learn and respond to decoy–
dominantrelationshipsintheirsearchprocess. Wefacesigniﬁcantmodelingchallengesinthecurrent
context given the aggregate nature of our data. Future research could potentially address such issues
when consumer-level search data are available. Another direction is to jointly model demand for and
37

supply of diamonds. We are less concerned with the diamond suppliers’ optimal pricing decisions
in our application since our focus is the DE on the demand side. Modeling the suppliers’ pricing
decisions under the DE might be an avenue for future study if such supplier-level information is
observed. A third direction is to consider the DE across multiple retailers since consumers might
search products from diﬀerent retailers. In our setting, since the retailer captures about 50% of
the market share in the U.S., this issue was not a major concern. It might be worth pursuing in
a diﬀerent product market when data of multiple retail outlets are available. Finally, as Bell and
Lattin (2000) studied the impact of price response heterogeneity in quantifying loss aversion, it is
worthwhile to investigate the same factor for the DE. We partially achieve this by allowing the
DE to diﬀer across diamond price segments. When consumer-level panel data are available, the
heterogeneity in both price responses and the DE could be better formulated in the future.
References
Bell, David R, James M Lattin. 2000. Looking for loss aversion in scanner panel data: The con-
founding eﬀect of price response heterogeneity. Marketing Science 19(2) 185–200.
Bettman, James R, Mary Frances Luce, John W Payne. 1998. Constructive consumer choice pro-
cesses.Journal of consumer research 25(3) 187–217.
Biswas, Abhijit, EdwardABlair.1991. Contextualeﬀectsofreferencepricesinretailadvertisements.
Journal of marketing 55(3) 1–12.
Burdett, Kenneth, Kenneth L Judd. 1983. Equilibrium price dispersion. Econometrica: Journal of
the Econometric Society 955–969.
Chiang, Jeongwen, Siddhartha Chib, Chakravarthi Narasimhan. 1998. Markov chain monte carlo
and models of consideration set and parameter heterogeneity. Journal of Econometrics 89(1-2)
223–248.
De los Santos, Babur, Ali Hortaçsu, Matthijs R Wildenbeest. 2012. Testing models of consumer
search using data on web browsing and purchasing behavior. American Economic Review 102(6)
2955–80.
Frederick, Shane, Leonard Lee, Ernest Baskin. 2014. The limits of attraction. Journal of Marketing
Research51(4) 487–507.
Guo, Liang, Wenbo Wang. 2016. Compromise eﬀects explained by contextual deliberation reveal
the rationality in preference construction. Working paper, Chinese University of Hong Kong .
Hardie, Bruce GS, Eric J Johnson, Peter S Fader. 1993. Modeling loss aversion and reference
dependence eﬀects on brand choice. Marketing science 12(4) 378–394.
Heath, T B, S Chatterjee, K R France. 1995. Mental accounting and changes in price: the frame
dependence of reference dependence. Journal of consumer research 2290–97.
38

Honka, Elisabeth. 2014. Quantifying search and switching costs in the us auto insurance industry.
The RAND Journal of Economics 45(4) 847–884.
Huber, J, J W Payne, C Puto. 1982. Adding asymmetrically dominated alternatives: Violations of
regularity and the similarity hypothesis. Journal of consumer research 9(1) 90–98.
Huber, J, C Puto. 1983. Market boundaries and product choice: Illustrating attraction and substi-
tution eﬀects. Journal of consumer research 1031–44.
Huber, Joel, John W Payne, Christopher P Puto. 2014. Let’s be honest about the attraction eﬀect.
Journal of Marketing Research 51(4) 520–525.
Kahneman, Daniel. 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decisions under risk. Econometrica 47
278.
Kalyanaram, Gurumurthy, Russell S Winer. 1995. Empirical generalizations from reference price
research. Marketing science 14(3_supplement) G161–G169.
Kamakura, Wagner A, Rajendra K Srivastava. 1984. Predicting choice shares under conditions of
brand interdependence. Journal of Marketing Research 420–434.
Khan,Uzma,MengZhu,AjayKalra.2011. WhenTrade-OﬀsMatter: TheEﬀectofChoiceConstrual
on Context Eﬀects. Journal of Marketing Research 48(1) 62–71.
Kivetz, Ran, Oded Netzer, V Srinivasan. 2004. Alternative models for capturing the compromise
eﬀect.Journal of marketing research 41(3) 237–257.
Lancaster, Tony. 1979. Econometric methods for the duration of unemployment. Econometrica:
Journal of the Econometric Society 939–956.
Lehmann, Donald R, Yigang Pan. 1994. Context Eﬀects, New Brand Entry, and Consideration
Sets.Journal of Marketing Research 31(3) 364.
Luce, R Duncan. 1959. Individual Choice Behavior . John Wiley & Sons, Inc, New York.
Luce, R Duncan. 1977. The choice axiom after twenty years. Journal of Mathematical Psychology
15215–233.
Lynch Jr, John G, Dipankar Chakravarti, Anusree Mitra. 1991. Contrast eﬀects in consumer judg-
ments: Changes in mental representations or in the anchoring of rating scales? Journal of
Consumer Research 18(3) 284–297.
Mazumdar, Tridib, Sevilimedu P Raj, Indrajit Sinha. 2005. Reference price research: Review and
propositions. Journal of marketing 69(4) 84–102.
Monroe, Kent B. 1973. Buyers’ subjective perceptions of price. Journal of marketing research 10(1)
70–80.
Morewedge, Carey K, Meng Zhu, Eva C Buechel, Andrea C Morales. 2018. Hedonic contrast eﬀects
are larger when comparisons are social. Journal of Consumer Research .
Müller, Holger, Victor Schliwa, Sebastian Lehmann. 2014. Prize decoys at work—new experimental
evidence for asymmetric dominance eﬀects in choices on prizes in competitions. International
Journal of Research in Marketing 31(4) 457–460.
39

Orhun, A Yesim. 2009. Optimal product line design when consumers exhibit choice set-dependent
preferences. Marketing Science 28(5) 868–886.
Rajendran, Kharan N, Gerard J Tellis. 1994. Contextual and temporal components of reference
price.Journal of Marketing 58(1) 22–34.
Ratneshwar, S, A D Shocker, D W Stewart. 1987. Toward understanding the attraction eﬀect: The
implications of product stimulus meaningfulness and familiarity. Journal of consumer research
13520–533.
Rooderkerk, Robert P, Harald J Van Heerde, Tammo HA Bijmolt. 2011. Incorporating context
eﬀects into a choice model. Journal of Marketing Research 48(4) 767–780.
Royle, JoneR,DavidJ.O’Connor, GarethM.Reynolds, PaulA.Bottomley.1999. Therobustnessof
the asymmetrically dominated eﬀect: Buying frames, phantom alternative, and instore purchases.
Psychology and Marketing 16(3) 225–243.
Siddarth, S, Randolph E Bucklin, Donald G Morrison. 1995. Making the cut: Modeling and ana-
lyzing choice set restriction in scanner panel data. Journal of Marketing Research 32(3) 255–266.
Simonson, I. 1989. Choice based on reasons: The case of attraction and compromise eﬀects. Journal
of consumer research 16158–174.
Simonson, Itamar. 2014. Vices and virtues of misguided replications: The case of asymmetric
dominance. Journal of Marketing Research 51(4) 514–519.
Tversky, A. 1972. Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice. Psychological review 79281–299.
Van Nierop, Erjen, Bart Bronnenberg, Richard Paap, Michel Wedel, Philip Hans Franses. 2010. Re-
trieving unobserved consideration sets from household panel data. Journal of Marketing Research
47(1) 63–74.
Wedell, Douglas H. 1991. Distinguishing among models of contextually induced preference reversals.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 17(4) 767–778.
Yang, Sybil, Michael Lynn. 2014. More evidence challenging the robustness and usefulness of the
attraction eﬀect. Journal of Marketing Research 51(4) 508–513.
40

Proﬁting from the Decoy Eﬀect: A Case Study of an Online Diamond Retailer
Wu and Cosguner, 2020, Marketing Science
Web Appendices
A A Statistical Test for the Source of the Observed Price Variation
In this web appendix, we develop a statistical test to understand whether the observed price vari-
ations in the data can be solely explained by consumer search, or if they are suggestive of both
consumer search and the DE.
Burdett and Judd (1983) proved that when consumers search for price, even for homogeneous
products, price variations can arise in equilibrium. The intuition is that because of consumer search
cost, consumers may not discover all options; and as a result, high-priced options may be purchased
by some consumers. Further, in the mixed-strategy pricing equilibrium, each observed price point
generates the same expected proﬁt. Hong and Shum (2006) used this idea of mixed-strategy pricing
equilibrium to recover consumer search-cost distribution purely from observed price variations for
textbooks—a typical homogeneous good. We borrow this idea to conduct our statistical test. For
diamonds with identical 4Cs (i.e., the same grade), denoted by the set J, we observe two types
of price variations: 1) across diamonds in the set Jon dayt, and 2) within the same diamond
(identiﬁed by SKU) over time. We use pjtto denote the price of diamond jon dayt. We use
Phj(tjpjt)to denote the sale response function conditional on price. Because the retailer has a ﬁxed
margin ( 1 r= 18%) in our market setting, the wholesale price of suppliers becomes wjt=rpjt.
We denote the marginal cost for suppliers as cjt.
If there is no DE in the sale response function Phj(tjpjt)(i.e., the observed price variation is
driven solely by consumer search), for a supplier, setting prices either through maximizing the total
expectedproﬁtfromasetofdiamondsorthroughmaximizingtheexpectedproﬁtforeachindividual
diamond (in the corresponding set) will yield the same set of prices and ultimately the same total
proﬁt. However, when the DE exists along with consumer search, this no longer holds since decoys
boost their dominants’ demand, i.e., decoys bring positive externality to the proﬁtability of their
dominants. Therefore, we predict the expected proﬁt from dominants to be higher than that of
decoys. In other words, if the DE exists together with consumer search, each price point in the
1

support of the observed price distribution would no longer yield the same expected proﬁt, i.e.,
dominants will have higher expected proﬁts compared to decoys. The supplier’s expected proﬁt
from diamond jon daytis:
jt= (rpjt cjt)Phj(tjpjt): (A.1)
Under the assumption of no DE, assume that suppliers have priced optimally, in which case, the
following ﬁrst-order condition should hold:@jt
@pjt= 0. Note that this optimality condition holds for
any price observed in the marketplace, because under mixed pricing equilibrium, each price point
generates the same optimal proﬁt. From this optimality condition, we can invert the following
marginal cost:
cjt=rpjt(1 +1
jt); (A.2)
wherejt= [@Phj(tjpjt)
@pjt][pjt
Phj(tjpjt)]is the price elasticity at price pjt.
However, when there is DE, this relationship is no longer true, because decoys serve as “loss
leaders” and generate less expected proﬁts than their dominants. Consequently, for high-priced
decoys, the recovered costs under the optimality condition without the DE will be higher than the
true costs; while the opposite is true for low-priced dominants. Therefore, using Equation (A.2)
leads us to a relationship where the calculated cost cjtincreases with the observed price pjtfor
identical diamonds. We use this idea in our proposed statistical tests. In the ﬁrst test (labeled
as Test I), we assume that the suppliers’ marginal costs of diamonds with identical attributes are
the same, i.e., cjt=c;8j2J;8t. It might be a reasonable assumption in this particular industry,
because diamonds are supplied globally by a few dominant manufacturers. Further, this assumption
was also used by both Burdett and Judd (1983) and Hong and Shum (2006). To conduct our test,
we proceed with the following steps:
1. Use a proportional hazard model to ﬁt the sale response function Phj(tjpjt)with polynomials
ofpjt(we use linear, quadratic, and cubic forms), diamond characteristics, and daily demand
controls to control for focal and over-time demand eﬀects.
2. Invert the implied cost ccjtusing Equation (A.2) for each observed price point under our null
hypothesis that observed price variation is driven by consumer search only.
2

3. Regressccjtover the relative price index rpjt= (pjt pJt)=pJt(pJtis the average price of
diamonds in Jon dayt) and other control variables such as diamond characteristics, daily
demand eﬀects, and grade average prices.
If the estimated coeﬃcient for rpjtis insigniﬁcant, then the test favors the null hypothesis that
price dispersion could be explained based on consumer search alone; if the coeﬃcient is positive
and signiﬁcant, we would have the statistical support to reject the null hypothesis, and the results
would be consistent with the price variations being driven by the DE along with consumer search.
In our second test (labeled as Test II), we relax the cost assumption ( cjt=c;8j2J;8t) from Test
I. Instead, we impose the following assumption: For the same diamond j, the cost for the supplier
would be the same over time, i.e., cjt=c;8t. In other words, diamonds in the same grade might
have diﬀerent costs, but this cost is time-invariant. We use the within-diamond over time price
variation to test our hypothesis and follow the same steps as in Test I, except that in Step 3, we
run the regressions using diamond-level (i.e., SKU-level) ﬁxed eﬀects as controls and test whether
the coeﬃcient for rpjtis signiﬁcant. We repeat Test I and II for each of the three diamond price
segments (low-, medium-, and high-price) and report the results in Table A1. Both tests reject the
null hypothesis (i.e., the price variation arises solely from consumer search) and support the DE
coexisting with consumer search.
Table A1: Test of the Source of the Observed Price Variation
Variable 2K–5K 5K–10K 10K–20K
Test I
Controls 4Cs, daily demand eﬀects, pJt
rpjt 2.172(0.001) 5.401(0.002) 12.721(0.003)
Adj. R-squared 0.987 0.995 0.996
Test II
Controls diamond ﬁxed eﬀects
rpjt 1.178(0:028) 1.917(0.052) 1.143(0.167)
Adj. R-squared 0.943 0.960 0.945
Note:Estimates withandare signiﬁcant at the 0.05 and 0.10 levels, respectively. Dependent
variable—estimated cost—is in 1000 dollars. In Test II, we randomly sample 500 diamonds in
each price segment.
3

B Derivation of Diamond-Level Sale Hazard from Consumer Primitives
In this web appendix, we derive our diamond-level proportional hazard model (Equation 1 in the
manuscript) from consumer primitives including consumer arrival process ,search,consideration set
formation , and conditional choice probabilities . We further discuss 1) how we embed the DE in
consumers’ conditional choice probabilities, and 2) how our speciﬁcation serves as a test for the DE.
B.1 Individual Primitives and Continuous-Time Diamond Hazard
We assume that potential diamond consumers arrive at random times to the retailer’s website. In
each speciﬁc time (can be a millisecond), we assume that at most one consumer would be making a
diamond purchase decision. A representative consumer i, arriving at time i, searches the retailer’s
website to form her consideration set and then decides whether to purchase one of the diamonds
from that set that maximizes her utility or not to purchase any diamonds. In terms of search,
we assume independence across diamonds—that is, the probability that a particular diamond is
included is independent of any other diamonds being included or not.1We denote the consumer i’s
consideration set as Mi, and the super set containing all the possible consideration sets as M.
We deﬁne the conditional choice probability of consumer ichoosing a particular diamond j
from her consideration set, given jhas not been sold before i, assi(jjMi)(to be discussed in the
following subsection in detail). The expected sale probability of diamond jat timeiis thus the
sum of the choice probabilities over all possible consideration sets:
!j(i) =X
Mi2MPr(Mi)si(jjMi): (B.1)
Note that this consumer- and diamond-speciﬁc choice probability is equal to the sale hazard of
diamondjat timei. This is the case because it is the conditional probability that diamond j
will be sold at iconditional on it not being sold until i, and the consumer iis the only consumer
deciding whether jwould be purchased at this particular time.
1Note that this assumption holds under simultaneous but not sequential search. Researchers have documented
empirical evidence in support of both sequential (Zhang et al., 2017) and simultaneous search in the literature (De los
Santos et al., 2012; Honka and Chintagunta, 2016).
4

B.2 Embedding the DE into the Continuous-Time Diamond Hazard
For a speciﬁc diamond j, we can classify diamonds into three mutually exclusive and collectively
exhaustive types based on their relationships to j. The set of Co
jcontains diamonds that are neither
dominants nor decoys to j; the setCDominant
j contains all diamonds that are dominating j; and
ﬁnally, the set CDecoy
jrepresents the collection of j’s decoys. Denote as Mo
ijthe set of diamonds
fromCo
jthat are in consumer i’s consideration set, and similarly MDominant
ij andMDecoy
ijthe sets
of diamonds (in i’s consideration set) that are from j’s dominants set ( CDominant
j ) and decoys set
(CDecoy
j). Denote Mo
j,MDominant
j, and MDecoy
jas the super sets of Mo
ij,MDominant
ij andMDecoy
ij,
respectively. We now can express consumer i’s consideration set Mias a combination of j,Mo
ij,
MDominant
ij andMDecoy
ij, and deﬁne the choice probability si(jjMi)accordingly:2
si(jjMi) =8
>>>>>><
>>>>>>:0; ifj =2Mi
si(jjj[Mo
ij); ifj2Mi&MDominant
ij =?&MDecoy
ij =?
0; ifj2Mi&MDominant
ij6=?
si(jjj[Mo
ij[MDecoy
ij );ifj2Mi&MDecoy
ij6=?&MDominant
ij =?:(B.2)
In the above equation, jhas a choice probability of zero in the ﬁrst case simply because it is not
in the consideration set. The choice probability is also zero in the third case, because we assume
that consumers are rational, and once a dominant is included in the choice set, the inferior decoy
diamondjwill never be purchased. Also, notice that in the last case, the consumer will only choose
an option from the subset, not from MDecoy
ij, because diamonds in MDecoy
ijare inferior to option
jand a rational consumer would not buy those decoys. In other words, the eﬀective choice set
becomes the same as the second case. If there is no DE, si(jjj[Mo
ij) =si(jjj[Mo
ij[MDecoy
ij );
however, if there is DE, we would expect the presence of diamonds from MDecoy
ijto increase the
attractiveness and thus the choice probability of diamond j. To capture that demand boost due to
the DE, we denote the relationship between the two conditional choice probabilities as follows.
si(jjj[Mo
ij[MDecoy
ij ) =si(jjj[Mo
ij)qi(j;Mo
ij;MDecoy
ij ); (B.3)
whereqi(j;Mo
ij;MDecoy
ij )is a scalar that aﬀects the choice probability of option j, and is a function
2The functional form of si(jjMi)could be very general. Since we do not have individual-level data, we do not
specify its functional form here. A natural choice could be the multinomial logit model.
5

of dominance relationships in the choice set. Note that qi(j;Mo
ij;MDecoy
ij ) = 1if there is no DE;
qi(j;Mo
ij;MDecoy
ij )>1if there is DE. Given Equations (B.2) and (B.3), we next aggregate the choice
probability over the possible consideration sets to derive the continuous-time diamond hazard from
Equation (B.1) as follows:
!j(i) =X
Mi2MPr(Mi)si(jjMi)
=X
Mo
ij2Mo
jPr(Mi=j[Mo
ij)si(jjj[Mo
ij)+
X
Mo
ij2Mo
jX
MDecoy
ij2MDecoy
jPr(Mi=j[Mo
ij[MDecoy
ij )si(jjj[Mo
ij[MDecoy
ij )
=X
Mo
ij2Mo
jPr(Mi=j[Mo
ij)si(jjj[Mo
ij)+
X
Mo
ij2Mo
jX
MDecoy
ij2MDecoy
jPr(Mi=j[Mo
ij[MDecoy
ij )si(jjj[Mo
ij)qi(j;Mo
ij;MDecoy
ij )
=Pr(j2Mi)Pr(MDecoy
ij =?)Pr(MDominant
ij =?)X
Mo
ij2Mo
jPr(Mo
ij2Mi)si(jjj[Mo
ij)+
Pr(j2Mi)Pr(MDominant
ij =?)X
Mo
ij2Mo
jPr(Mo
ij2Mi)si(jjj[Mo
ij)
X
MDecoy
ij2MDecoy
j;MDecoy
ij6=?Pr(MDecoy
ij2Mi)qi(j;Mo
ij;MDecoy
ij ):(B.4)
In the above derivation, we ﬁrst use Equation (B.2) (i.e., two non-zero choice probabilities on the
second and fourth lines) to obtain the second line of Equation (B.4). Next, we use Equation (B.3) to
move from the second to the third line of Equation (B.4). We then use the independence assumption
to move from the third to the fourth line of Equation (B.4). Next, we deﬁne the following:
si(jjj;Mo
j) =X
Mo
ij2Mo
jPr(Mo
ij2Mi)si(jjj[Mo
ij): (B.5)
Givensi(jjj;Mo
j)from Equation (B.5), we then deﬁne the following:
qi(j;Mo
j;MDecoy
j ) =X
Mo
ij2Mo
jPr(Mo
ij2Mi)si(jjj[Mo
ij)qi(j;Mo
ij;MDecoy
j )=si(jjj;Mo
j);(B.6)
whereqi(jjMo
ij;MDecoy
j ) =P
MDecoy
ij2MDecoy
j;MDecoy
ij6=?Pr(MDecoy
ij2Mi)qi(j;Mo
ij;MDecoy
ij )
=Pr(MDecoy
ij6=?). Plugging si(jjj;Mo
j)andqi(j;Mo
j;MDecoy
j )from Equation (B.5) and (B.6) into
(B.4), and rearranging the terms, we can simplify Equation (B.4) as follows:
6

!j(i) =X
Mi2MPr(Mi)si(jjMi)
=Pr(j2Mi)Pr(MDecoy
ij =?)Pr(MDominant
ij =?)si(jjj;Mo
j)+
Pr(j2Mi)Pr(MDecoy
ij6=?)Pr(MDominant
ij =?)si(jjj;Mo
j)qi(j;Mo
j;MDecoy
j )
=Pr(j2Mi)si(jjj;Mo
j)
Pr(MDominant
ij =?)h
Pr(MDecoy
ij =?) +Pr(MDecoy
ij6=?)qi(j;Mo
j;MDecoy
j )i
:(B.7)
Note thatqi(j;Mo
j;MDecoy
j )is the average of qi(j;Mo
j;MDecoy
j )weighted by the probability of
havingMDecoy
ij; andqi(jjMo
ij;MDecoy
j )istheaverageof qi(jjMo
ij;MDecoy
j )weightedbytheprobability
of havingMo
ij. Thus, the ﬁnal qi(j;Mo
ij;MDecoy
j )is the average of all the qi(jj:)weighted by the
probability of all the possible combinations of MDecoy
ijandMo
ij.
Equation (B.7) tells us that the aggregate sale hazard in the continuous time can be decomposed
to the sum of two components: 1) the probability that no decoy–dominant relationships are included
in the consideration set times the aggregate choice probability over all no dominants–no decoys sets
(i.e., the baseline choice probability); and 2) the probability that a diamond’s decoys but not
dominants are included in the consideration set times the baseline choice probability multiplied
by an additional aggregate term qthat depends on the decoy–dominant structure. From the DE
theory, we know that for each speciﬁc consideration set, qi(j;Mo
ij;MDecoy
j )1, i.e., it cannot be the
case that adding dominated options to the choice set would reduce the choice share of a dominant.
When thisqfunction aggregates to the market level, it is a weighted average of all the consideration
set-levelqs. Therefore, the aggregate qi(j;Mo
ij;MDecoy
j )1. Asqi(j;Mo
ij;MDecoy
j )1captures
the potential DE at the individual-choice level, testing whether qi(j;Mo
ij;MDecoy
j )1equals testing
whether on average the DE exists in individual choices, i.e., whether Eqi(j;Mo
ij;MDecoy
j )1.
B.3 Daily Diamond Hazard
We now derive the aggregate-level sale hazard for diamond jat discrete time, i.e., day t. We assume
ntpotential consumers arrive randomly during day t, and each consumer can be represented by
consumeri3. By deﬁnition in survival analysis, we know the survival function for diamond jat the
end of day t, thusSj(t)is deﬁned as:
3We use a representative consumer to simplify the derivation of the functional form speciﬁcation. Our derivation
can be extended to include heterogeneous consumer segments where the current model components (i.e., dominance
detection and hazard boost) can be interpreted as the weighted average eﬀect from heterogeneous segments.
7

Sj(t) =e Hj(t); (B.8)
whereHj(t) =Rt
0!j(i)dis the cumulative hazard function.
We usePhj(t)to denote the hazard in the discrete time for diamond jon dayt:
Phj(t) =Sj(t 1) Sj(t)
Sj(t 1)
= 1 e (Hj(t) Hj(t 1))
= 1 e hj(t);(B.9)
wherehj(t) =nt!j(i), and the corresponding survival function is Sj(t) = t
k=1e hj(k).
B.4 Functional Form Speciﬁcation
Based on our derivation of !j(i)in Equation (B.7), we now can write hj(t)in Equation (B.9) as
follows:
hj(t) =nt!j(i)
=ntPr(j2Mi)si(jjj;Mo
j)
Pr(MDominant
ij =?)h
Pr(MDecoy
ij =?) +Pr(MDecoy
ij6=?)qi(j;Mo
j;MDecoy
j )i
:(B.10)
In the above equation, the ntPr(j2Mi)si(jjj;Mo
j)component represents the daily hazard
for diamond j. The second component, Pr(MDominant
ij =?)[Pr(MDecoy
ij =?) +Pr(MDecoy
ij6=
?)qi(j;Mo
j;MDecoy
j )], represents the combined eﬀect of the probability of diamond dominance de-
tection4and the boost in sales upon dominant detection. Therefore, we operationalize the hazard
hj(t)at discrete time in Equation(B.10) as follows:
hj(t) = j()j(): (B.11)
Equation (B.11) is the same as Equation (1) in our manuscript. This completes our derivation
of the diamond-speciﬁc sale hazard function based on individual consumer primitives.
4In aggregate, the probability of diamond dominance detection can also be interpreted as the size of the consumer
segment detecting the dominance relationship.
8

C Log-Hazard Derivation
BasedonourmodelspeciﬁcationsinEquations(2)and(6),wecanderivethelog-hazardspeciﬁcation
as:
lnhj(t) =bj+Xjt+I(Decoy ) ln(1 PrDecoy
jt ) +I(Dominant ) ln
(1 PrDominant
jt ) +PrDominant
jtQjt
=bj+Xjt+I(Decoy ) ln1
1 +eDDecoy
jtDecoy
+I(Dominant ) ln"
1
1 +eDDominant
jtDominant+eDDominant
jtDominanteDDominant
jtBoost
1 +eDDominant
jtDominant#
=bj+Xjt|{z}
daily diamond sale hazard I(Decoy ) ln(1 +eDDecoy
jtDecoy)| {z }
dominance hazard of a decoy
+I(Dominant )h
ln(1 +eDDominant
jt(Dominant+Boost)) ln(1 +eDDominant
jtDominant)i
| {z }
dominance hazard of a dominant;
(C.1)
whereDDecoy
jt =fKj;lnRDominant
jt;I(rpjt>0)rpjt;spjtg,DDominant
jt =fKj;lnRDecoys
jt;I(rpjt<
0)( rpjt);spjtgandI(Decoy )andI(Dominant )are indicators for a diamond with dominants and
decoys, respectively.
D Simulation Studies to Illustrate the Model Identiﬁcation
In our ﬁrst simulation study, we use the diamonds observed in our data and simulate their sales
by using the proposed hazard speciﬁcation (with the DE). Then, we estimate our proposed model
with this simulated sales data. The simulation study yields that we can recover back the assumed
parameters with high accuracy. Please see the ﬁrst two columns of Table A2 below for the results
of this simulation study. We also conduct additional simulation studies with various detection-
levels and dominant boost-levels and ﬁnd that we can precisely recover the assumed parameter
values irrespective of the assumed size of the detection and dominant boost levels. Results of these
additional analyses are available upon request.
9

Table A2: Results of the Simulation Studies Regarding the Model Identiﬁcation
With Dominance Hazard Without Dominance Hazard
Variable True Value Estimate No Restriction Restrict Boost
Market-Level Detection Probability
Low-Price Segment  3:000 3:105**(0:200) 34:758 (na) 12:509 (164:066)
Medium-Price Segment  3:000 2:995**(0:181) 23:269 (na) 12:290 (21:587)
High-Price Segment  3:000 3:142**(0:215) 21:235 (na) 9:647 (154:853)
ln(RDominant
jt ) 0 :500 0 :473**(0:051) 5 :172 (na) 0:438 (62:541)
I(rpjt>0)(rpjt) 2 :000 2 :489**(0:771) 0 :059 (na) 0:011 (24:788)
spjt 0:500 0 :528**(0:060) 10:767 (na) 7:451 (53:051)
Dominant Boost Hazard
Low-Price Segment 1:000 1 :174**(0:165) 13 :419 (na) 0 :000
Medium-Price Segment 1:000 1 :037**(0:152) 9:239 (na) 0 :000
High-Price Segment 1:000 1 :150**(0:180) 14:611 (na) 0 :000
ln(RDecoy
jt ) 0 :300 0 :295**(0:034) 0:894 (na) 0 :000
I(rpjt<0)( rpjt) 1 :000 0 :799 (0:545) 3:705 (na) 0 :000
spjt 0:600 0 :591**(0:038) 1 :572 (na) 0 :000
Note:Numbers reported are mean estimates and standard errors. Estimates withandare signiﬁcant at
the 0.05 and 0.10 levels, respectively. As noted above, separately identifying Decoy Dominant Detection
and Dominant Boost components is not possible with no DE in the data. Hence, the standard errors
cannot be calculated in the speciﬁcation with no restriction due to singular numerical hessian. Other
controls (diamond 4Cs, competition, etc.) are included in the daily diamond sale hazard but not reported
here to save space.
In our second simulation study, we again use the diamonds observed in our data. Unlike the ﬁrst
simulation study, this time, we simulate the sales of diamonds by using only the Daily Diamond
Sale Hazard component of our hazard speciﬁcation (i.e., no DE). In other words, while simulating
the sales data, we assume the decoy-dominant detection probabilities of being strictly zero, and the
dominanceboostofbeingone. Then, weestimateourproposedhazardmodelbyusingthesimulated
data. This second simulation study suggests that, without the DE in the data, it is not possible to
separately identify the detection and dominant boost components because as long as the detection
is equal to zero the dominant boost size can take any value. Consequently, even if we can get the
point estimates using MLE, the hessian matrix is numerically singular, and we can not compute the
standard errors (n.a. in the second column of the following table). The large negative values on the
pointestimatesoftheprice-segmentdummiesalsoshowthatthedetectionprobabilitiesarenearzero
(intheexptransformation), indicatingthatindeedwewouldnotﬁndsigniﬁcantlynon-zerodetection
probabilities. We further ﬁx the dominant boost component to be one (equivalently parameters are
set to zero in the log transformation) and estimate the detection probability parameters. The last
10

column in the following table shows the estimation results. The point estimates are, again, large and
negative, which indicates that we would not ﬁnd numerically non-zero detection probabilities. The
standard errors are large in this scenario because the estimated parameters can take a large range
of values in the negative domain to make the detection probabilities numerically equal to zero (for
example, intercepts of -10 versus -1000 yield practically identical, i.e., zero detection probabilities).
In conclusion, the simulation studies yield that 1) we can recover the detection- and dominant
boost-levels precisely as long as there exists DE in the data; 2) without the DE in the data, we
cannot identify the dominance boost hazard component of our proposed speciﬁcation. In other
words, the functional form chosen can not cause one to infer the DE if such DE is not present in
the data (Simulation 2). However, if the DE exists in the data, the proposed model can recover the
size of the eﬀect accurately (Simulation 1).
11

References
Burdett, Kenneth, Kenneth L Judd. 1983. Equilibrium price dispersion. Econometrica: Journal of
the Econometric Society 955–969.
De los Santos, Babur, Ali Hortaçsu, Matthijs R Wildenbeest. 2012. Testing models of consumer
search using data on web browsing and purchasing behavior. American Economic Review 102(6)
2955–80.
Hong, Han, Matthew Shum. 2006. Using price distributions to estimate search costs. The RAND
Journal of Economics 37(2) 257–275.
Honka, Elisabeth, Pradeep Chintagunta. 2016. Simultaneous or sequential? search strategies in the
us auto insurance industry. Marketing Science 36(1) 21–42.
Zhang, Xing, Tat Y Chan, Ying Xie. 2017. Price search and periodic price discounts. Management
Science64(2) 495–510.
12

