 
1 
  
Channel Intermediaries and Manufac turer Performance: An Exploratory 
Investigation in an Emerging Market 
 
 
   
Amalesh Sharma* 
Koray Cosguner 
Tarun K. Sharma 
Manoj Motiani 
 
  
September 2020 
  
 
 
Amalesh Sharma is an Assistant Professor of  Marketing at Mays Business School - Texas A&M 
University, College Station, TX (email: asharma@mays.tamu.edu ). Koray Cosguner is an Assistant 
Professor of Marketing at Kelley School of Busine ss, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN (email: 
kcosgun@iu.edu ). Tarun K. Sharma is a doctoral student in the Executive Fellow Programme in 
Management at the Indian Institute of Management, Indore, India (email: fi17taruns@iimidr.ac.in ). 
Manoj Motiani is an Associate Professor of Marketi ng, Indian Institute of Management, Indore, India 
(email: manojm@iimidr.ac.in ).  
*Corresponding author 
Authors thank the participants of the JR Though t Leadership Conference on M etrics and Analytics in 
Retailing, Atlanta, for their valuable insights, comme nts, and suggestions on the earlier version of the 
manuscript. The authors thank the data providing ma nufacturer for its support. The authors also thank 
the participating intermediaries and the managers in the qualitative study for their insights and support. 
Finally, the authors thank the managers of the data providing manufacturer who are instrumental in implementing the insights from the research and providing us the results. 

 
2 
  
Channel Intermediaries and Manufacturer Perfor mance: An Exploratory Investigation in an 
Emerging Market 
 
Abstract 
Channel intermediaries (hereafter, intermediaries) ar e among the most critical elements of any supply 
chain as the bulk of manufacturing output is tr ansported through them. However, we have a limited 
understanding of the approach a manufacturer should take to achieve the dual goal of increasing profitability and intermediary satisfaction. To provid e manufacturers with practical strategies to boost 
their performance and their intermediaries’ satisfacti on, we rely on three related studies. In Study 1, 
through interviews with managers and intermediar ies, we find that distribution alignment across 
intermediary, market, and product types may be a practical strategy for both manufacturers and 
intermediaries. In Study 2, by using a robust empi rical methodology with data from a construction 
product manufacturer operating in an emerging ma rket, we find that various combinations of 
intermediary, market, and product types affect the manufacturer’s performance differently. 
Accordingly, through a supply-side examination, we quantify the revenue impact of reallocating the 
studied manufacturer’s retail distribution resour ces among different intermediary-, market-, and 
product-type combinations. In Study 3, through a field implementation, we find that our recommended intermediary alignment strategy from Study 2 substantially boosts both the manufacturer’s performance (by 14% in revenue and 13% in profit) and intermediaries’ satisfaction 
(by 7.71%). Thus, with our qualitative, empirical, and field studies, we contribute to the existing 
research in channel management, emerging market reta iling, retail distribution, and marketing strategy.  
 Keywords:  channel intermediaries, manufacturers, intermediary management strategies, field 
implementation, retailing, distribution 
  

 
3 
 Introduction 
Channel intermediaries (hereafter, intermediaries) ar e the entities that fac ilitate the distribution 
of a manufacturer’s products to end consumers ( Kumar, Scheer and Steenkamp 1995 ). These 
intermediaries typically include dealers, wholesaler s, distributors, retailers, and institutional buyers1, 
and they are essential elements of any distributi on chain as they transport the bulk of a nation’s 
manufacturing output ( Krafft et al. 2015 ). For example, in the U.S., th e wholesale distribution market 
reached a record high of $6.01 trillion in 2018, up 7.5% from 20172; in India, the retail distribution 
market is projected to grow to $1.1 trillion by 2021 (from $672 billion in 2017)3. In addition to these 
substantial figures, many academic studies ( Watson IV et al. 2015 ; Arnold and Palmatier 2012 ; Bailey 
and Bakos 1997 ; Dahlquist and Griffith 2014 ; Coughlan 1985 ) and managerial insights ( Fites 1996 ) 
support the notion that intermediarie s are the backbone of a manufactu rer’s success. Accordingly, the 
extant literature has proposed several strategies, incl uding aligning brands with the retail store format 
(Kumar, Sunder and Sharma 2015 ), inventory sharing ( Zhao, Deshpande and Ryan 2005 ), and the 
management of power, relationships, and commitment ( Brown, Lusch and Nicholson 1995 ; Lassar 
and Kerr 1996 ) to manage intermediaries.  
Despite the abundance of studies in the domain of intermediary management, most studies 
focus on relationships between the two interacting part ies, i.e., manufacturers and intermediaries, by 
ignoring the fact that manufacturers typically 1) deal  with multiple intermediary types; 2) operate in 
different markets (with different demands and c onsumption capacities), and 3) sell a variety of 
products to meet heterogeneous customer needs. Furt her, most existing studies were carried out in 
 
1 Dealers are the link between distributors and consumers while distribut ors connect the manufacturer to dealers. The definition /classification of 
distributors/dealers can vary from industry to industry. On many occasions, distributor s are directly connected to retailers/bu yers. Institutional 
buyers are the organizations/institutions that purchase products fo r the use of their customers. For example, a school/college can be an institutional 
buyer that buys products for students’ consum ption. Similarly, a company can also be  an institutional buyer as it can purchase products for its 
employees. There is a marginal difference between distributors and wholesalers. “Distributors are independent selling agents, w ho sell specific 
goods, mainly as wholesalers. They usually purchase products dir ectly from the manufacturers at wholesale” prices and sell them  to dealers 
(https://smallbusiness.chron.com/ differences-between-wholesalers- distributors-retailers-30836.html ). When we talk about intermediaries, we refer 
to physical intermediaries, not on line intermediaries/resellers.  
2 https://www.naw.org/state-of-the-industry/ 
3 https://www.export.gov/article?id=Indi a-Distribution-and- Sales-Channels 

 
4 
 the context of developed markets, where intermediar ies are largely organized. Marketplace evidence 
confirms that emerging market manufacturers typica lly sell multiple products across multiple markets 
(e.g., rural and urban) by managing multiple types of intermediaries ( EGEDE 2013 ). Hence, the 
suggested insights from the literature regarding intermediary management may not apply to 
manufacturers managing intermediaries in a multi-pr oduct, multi-intermediary type, multi-market, and 
emerging economy context.  
Motivated by the gaps in the literature and ma rketplace evidence, to develop an implementable 
intermediary management strategy (across multiple  markets, intermediaries, and product types) for 
emerging market manufacturers, we conduct three rela ted studies. We start with a qualitative study 
(labeled as Study 1) by interviewing managers of  manufacturers and intermediaries across different 
industries. Study 1 reveals that managers do not have specific intermediary management strategies, 
apart from offering tangible (e.g., cash discount) an d intangible (e.g., a foreign vacation) benefits. Study 
1 also suggests that manufacturers’ push of produc ts (without a proper understanding of the demand) 
decreases the intermediary satisfaction. Lastly, and most importantly, Study 1 suggests that some form 
of distribution alignment across the intermediar y, market, and product types can improve both 
manufacturers’ profits and intermediaries’ satisfa ction. Thus, Study 1 not only motivates but also 
guides our other two studies.  
Building on Study 1, we lean on the Governance Value Analysis (GVA)  framework ( Ghosh 
and John 1999 ; Ghosh and John 2005 ) that explores the three-way alignment among resources, 
specific investments, and governance to argue that the alignment of intermediaries with the product 
and market types can be a strategy for manufacturers  to increase their profit and intermediaries’ 
satisfaction. Accordingly, our research objectives become the following: 1. Develop an implementable and effectiv e intermediary alignment strategy for emerging market manufacturers at the 
market and product type levels. 2. Quantify the impact of the developed intermediary alig nment strategy on the manufacturer’s profitability and 
intermediary satisfaction in the field. 

 
5 
  
Developing a multi-market-intermediary-prod uct distribution alignment strategy for 
manufacturers (i.e., our first research objective) requi res quantifying the differential impacts of various 
intermediary-, market-, and product-type combinat ions on the manufacturer’s revenue performance. 
To quantify these differential impacts, we use a robust  empirical approach (labeled as Study 2) and 
data from an emerging market construction product4 manufacturer. Using the estimated empirical 
model as an input, we quantify the revenue impact of increases/decreases in the number of intermediaries across various combinations. This analysis advises the manufacturer to increase its distribution i) in the urban and semi-urban markets (but not in the rural markets); ii) to the dealers 
(but not to the institutional buyers); and iii) of th e premium product except in the urban market (but 
not of the non-premium product), to boost its revenue.  
Given the distribution alignment strategy deve loped based on Study 2, we attempt to quantify 
the impact of its implementation on manufacturer pr ofitability and intermediary satisfaction (i.e., our 
second research objective). We achieve this by a regional field study (labeled as Study 3). Study 3 
suggests that the recommended alignment (from St udy 2) boosts the manufacturer’s profit by 13%, 
and intermediaries’ satisfaction by 7.71%.  
We contribute to the literature by developing  an implementable and effective intermediary 
management strategy that emerging market manufa cturers can use to boost their profitability and 
intermediary satisfaction. Our recommended approach  has the flexibility of allowing manufacturers 
to effectively manage their intermediaries across mult iple markets, intermediaries, and product types. 
By doing so, the paper shows that increased attention must be directed to managing intermediaries through implementable and effective strategies other than those outlined in the distribution channel 
literature. Further, the paper shows that along with  the existing relational governance strategies (e.g., 
 
4 Examples of construction products include, but are not limited to, asbestos, cement, and plaster materials. 

 
6 
 offering tangible and intangible benefits ( Heide 1994 ; Chatterji, Cunningham and Joseph 2019 )), 
realigning intermediaries with the product and mark et types can be a sustainable strategy for increasing 
profitability ( Palmatier et al. 2006 ).  
Besides, we show that even when there are mu ltiple layers (such as various intermediaries, 
markets, products, etc.), the GVA model can explain the effect of the suggested relational governance 
strategies (i.e., the alignment at the intermediari es, products, and market levels). Thus, we extend the 
GVA model’s scope and open the door for future research in this space. Moreover, our Study 3 contributes to the extant literature ( Geyskens, Steenkamp and Kumar 1999 ) by showing that the field 
implementation of empirical results is critical not onl y to verify empirical findings but also to help 
manufacturers improve their performance and interme diaries’ satisfaction. Finally, as regards to 
marketing strategy and practice, we contribute by demonstrating that manufacturers should not 
require all intermediaries to distribute all types of products in every market. Managers should 
understand and evaluate the market-intermediary- product level demand first and decide how to 
distribute their products accordingly.  
 Literature Review 
This section aims to provide a brief overview of th e literature on retail distribution strategies, channel 
governance, emerging markets, and the theoretical le ns that we lean on to link the channel governance 
to manufacturer performance and intermediary satisfaction. Moreover, we provide a distinct 
understanding of how we contribute to the existing  literature on distribution channels, governance, 
and intermediary satisfaction.  Representative Research on  Retail Distribution Strategies 
Extant literature on retail distribution investigated how manufacturers have concentrated 
mainly on building and implementing effective di stribution strategies to achieve profitability ( Kumar, 
Sunder and Sharma 2015 ; Kamakura, Kopalle and Lehmann 2014 ; Krafft et al. 2015 ). Within this 

 
7 
 stream of research, multiple advancements have been made to understand various aspects of 
manufacturer-intermediary relationships. Accordingl y, numerous meta-analysis papers have been 
developed in this space. 
Krafft et al. ( 2015 ) looked at the evolution of marketing  channel research methodologies and 
suggested that longitudinal design and experiment al research backed by qualitative research are 
required to uncover unknown facets of manufactu rer-intermediary relations, most importantly, how 
manufacturers can effectively align intermediarie s with product and market types to increase 
profitability and intermediaries’ sa tisfaction. Accordingly, we build on the future outlook offered by 
Krafft et al. ( 2015 ). Specifically, we use a multi-study approach (qualitative; empirical using longitudinal 
data; experimental through field implementation) to identify which channel strategies can benefit both 
manufacturers and intermediaries. 
Kamakura, Kopalle, and Lehmann ( 2014 ) identified essential topics in retail channel research 
that need further examination, including channel co-ordination and data-driven distribution, to 
improve profitability and shareholder value. Additionally, they advocated for managerial ability to implement the insights from empirical generalizati ons. We contribute to the findings of Kamakura, 
Kopalle, and Lehmann ( 2014 ) by using a data-driven approach to identify that alignment can improve 
the profitability of manufacturers and benefit inter mediaries. Moreover, we show how managers can 
implement the findings of an empirical investigati on and realize the effects of the insights gained 
through a field implementation. 
Watson IV et al. ( 2015 ) explored the marketing channels’evolution to identify trends and 
research directions. They recognized that two critical  decisions must be made concerning distribution 
channel strategies: channel selection ( Lilien 1979 ) and channel governance ( Heide 1994 ). In response 
to the insights offered by Watson IV et al. ( 2015 ), we contribute to the literature by identifying and 
examining another dimension of relational channel governance strategy –  alig ning intermediaries with 

 
8 
 the product and market types. Consiste nt with the extant distribution li terature, our research falls into 
the interaction of channel gove rnance and emerging markets.  
Managing Channel Governance and Intermediary Satisfaction 
The extant literature in channel governance ( Krafft et al. 2015 ; Watson IV et al. 2015 ) suggests 
that determining the appropriate channels to go to  market is vital to increase the marketing mix 
effectiveness ( Jeuland and Shugan 1988 ). Most manufacturers strategically decide on the types, 
numbers, and the differences of channels coexisting in the market ( Coughlan et al. 2006 ).  
Post channel selection, channel governance also includes the mechanism where a 
manufacturer must decide how to govern its exch anges with the intermediaries. Governance options 
range from formal (explicitly defined contractual ob ligations) governance structure to informal (verbal 
agreements) governance structure ( Heide 1994 ). As regards channel governance strategies, a 
manufacturer has multiple options: coercion  (Gaski and Nevin 1985 ; Gilliland, Bello and Gundlach 
2010 ); incentives and monitoring  (Gilliland and Kim 2014 ; Kashyap, Antia and Frazier 2012 ); relational 
governance  (Arnold and Palmatier 2012 ; Jap and Ganesan 2000 ); and idiosyncratic investments  (Ganesan 
1994 ).  Further, linking governance to performan ce, the extant literature has investigated how 
established inter-organizational relationships can shape choice and performance ( Elfenbein and 
Zenger 2014 ; Gulati 1995 ; Holloway and Parmigiani 2016 ; Chatterji, Cunningham and Joseph 2019 ). 
Extant literature on channel governance also em phasizes managing intermediary satisfaction 
and considers it an essential aspect of channel management strategies.  Many studies addressing 
intermediary satisfaction have found that such sa tisfaction is likely to lead to the long-term 
continuance of a relationship and is positively re lated to intermediary performance and commitment 
(Zineldin and Jonsson 2000 ). Our paper supplies the insights that  have to date been lacking in the 
literature about how a manufacturer’s action ca n help increase intermediary satisfaction 
(Gassenheimer and Ramsey 1994 ; Kalaignanam, Shankar and Varadarajan 2007 ). To the existing 

 
9 
 literature on intermediary satisfaction, we show  how a manufacturer’s actions in aligning 
intermediaries, products, and markets help  increase intermediary satisfaction.  
Channel Governance and Manufacturer Performance – Theoretical Background 
Extant literature has provided multiple concep tual frameworks to illustrate the relevance of 
channel governance strategies. However, the prominent among them is the governance value analysis (GVA) framework (Ghosh and John, 1995). Accordingly, we rely on the insights of the GVA framework as our theoretical lens, as explained subsequently, in the ‘theoretical background’ section 
to expose how alignment at the intermediary, prod uct, and market-levels may affect manufacturers’ 
performance. Here, we briefly introduce the GVA framework. 
The GVA model is proposed based on a combined understanding of economizing calculus of 
transaction-costs analysis and firms’ resource-base d view. It suggests that  “firm-specific resource 
endowments drive realized positioning to develop a strategizing calculus that posits a discriminating 
three-way fit among (1) resources, (2) specific invest ments, and (3) governance that yields the highest 
net receipts.”(Ghosh and John, 2005, pg. 347). In the GVA model, positioning  captures the delivery of 
value proposition to the partners (i.e., intermediaries) by the manufacturers ( Chung, Chatterjee and 
Sengupta 2012 ); resources  refer to a firm’s assets and capabilities that create value; specific investments  refer 
to investments by different parties (e.g., a manufacturer and an intermediary) that create mutual values 
and safeguard joint value created; and governance  refers to the type of relationship between the parties. 
A manufacturer’s selection of resources and speci fic investment backed by proper governance 
mechanisms can enhance channel performance by increasing manufacturers’ commitment to a seller 
(Anderson and Weitz 1992 ).  
Consistent with the GVA framework and our proposed alignment strategies, it is crucial to 
understand what ‘alignment’ means. The term ‘alignment’ refers to the extent to which there is a goal congruence between a manufacturer’s and an inter mediary’s self-interest (in our context). The 

 
10 
 alignment also refers to the complementary resour ces and capabilities among actors in a relationship 
that helps actors to create shared values ( Jap 1999 ; Anderson and Narayandas 2009 ; Narus and Donath 
2009 ). Research exposing alignment considers the a lignment of perspectives between dealers and a 
company and how such an alignment help ac hieve dealer satisfaction and commitment ( Venkatraman 
and Prescott 1990 ; Anisimova and Mavondo 2014 ). However, investigation of alignment at three levels 
- intermediary, product, and market - is rare.  
Managing Channel Intermediaries in Emerging Markets  
Managing intermediaries is complicated for emerging market manufacturers for reasons such 
as i) there exist a large number of intermediaries wi th various focuses, ii) customers are heterogeneous 
in their needs, iii) distribution is difficult due to infrastructural issues, etc. Thus, there is a growing 
body of literature studying channel strategies in emerging markets.  
Restricted access to capital, foreign exchan ge, technology development, and restrictions on 
market entry characterize emerging markets; thus, the number of organized manufacturers in emerging 
markets is fewer. However, these manufacturers  utilize a large number of intermediaries ( Stem and 
Adel 1988 ) due to low entry barriers, the emergence of the middle class,  changes in population 
structure, and demand-supply conditions ( Zikmund, D'Amico and Prough 1984 ). As demand-supply 
conditions in an economy affect channel distributi on and the degree of exchange relationships, the 
nature of the economy should influence a manufa cturer’s channel governance strategies. Due to 
market-specific differences, strategies used to manage intermediaries in developed economies may not hold in emerging markets ( Frazier, Gill and Kale 1989 ).  
In the context of emerging markets, the extant lit erature has investigated multiple elements of 
the behavior of intermediaries concerning a manufacturer ( Anderson and Narus 1984 ), such as 
dependence and reciprocal actions  in the distribution channel relationship and the conditions under 
which manufacturers can achieve competitive advantages due to such a reliance ( Brown, Lusch and 

 
11 
 Muehling 1983 ; Frazier 1983 ; Emerson 1962 ; Frazier, Gill and Kale 1989 ). Venkatesan et al. ( 2015 ) 
investigated distribution channel strategies in bot h full and self-service channels in one emerging 
economy. They have evaluated how a brand’s mark eting mix influences channel partners and 
consumer sales. Kumar et al. ( 2015 ) investigated how a firm can le verage distribution to maximize 
sales in an emerging market contex t. They found that not all products can be suitably sold through 
every retail store format; that is, store format and product form must be aligned. Sharma, Kumar, and 
Cosguner ( 2019) investigated manufacturer competition at the product form and store format-level 
and showed that a firm could maximize its profit by managing the number of stores in the various 
store formats for different product forms. However , unlike Sharma et al. (2019), the current study 
considers intermediary management at the market and product type level.  
Further, neither Kumar et al. ( 2015 ) nor Sharma et al. (2019) validates the profit implications 
of their recommended distribution strategies in th e field, unlike the current study. As discussed, 
intermediary research in the emerging market c ontext offers a limited understanding of how 
implementable relational governance strategies can be  developed to enhance manufacturer profit and 
intermediary satisfaction. Hence, our study fills this critical gap. Table 1 sets out the representative 
research in channel management, especially in th e context of manufacturer- intermediary relationships, 
and showcases how we contribute to the existing liter ature. Our unique contribution lies in capturing 
manufacturers’ intermediary management strategies when a manufacturer manages multiple -products, 
multi-intermediaries, and multi-markets.  

 
12 
 Table 1:  Related Literature, Research Gap and Unique Contributions of our Study 
Paper Context Single 
study/multi study^ Performance of 
manufacturers /intermediaries Multi-
product type Multi-
intermediary type Multi-
market type Channel 
intermediary satisfaction Alignment of 
channel intermediaries Field 
implementation Contributions 
Sharma et 
al.(2019) Emerging 
Market Single Study Yes Yes No No No No No They investigate the oligopolistic “competition at 
the brand, product form, and channel” level.  
Kumar, et al. (2015) Emerging 
Market Single Study Yes Yes No No No Yes No They investigate how a firm can leverage 
distribution to maximize sales.  
Gassenheimer and 
Ramsey ( 1994) Develop 
Market Single Study No No No No Yes No No They examine the “level of mutual dependence 
and power-dependence imbalances across buyer (reseller) supply sources”.  
Kumar, Scheer, and Steenkamp 
(1995) Develop 
Market Single Study No No No No No No No They “propose that the degree of both 
interdependence asymmetry and total 
interdependence affect the level of inter-firm 
conflict, trust, and commitment”. 
“Frazier, Gill, and Kale ( 1989) Emerging 
Market Single Study No No No No Yes No No They “expand the understanding of the 
dependence and reciprocal action constructs in distribution channel relationships”. 
Brown, Lusch, and Nicholson 
(1995) Develop 
Market Single Study Yes No No No Yes No No They investigate the “impact of supplier's use of 
power on the retailer’s commitment to the channel 
relationship and supplier and retailer 
performance”. 
Skinner, Gassenheimer , and Kelley ( 1992) Develop 
Market Single Study No No No No Yes No No They find that the conflict in a supplier-dealer 
relationship reduces satisfaction.   
Frazier ( 1983) Develop 
Market Single Study No No No No Yes No No Dealer dependence relates “positively to an inter-
firm agreement on marketing strategy”, dealer 
satisfaction, and the manufacturer's perceived 
interest in the dealer's welfare. 
Geyskens, Steenkamp, and Kumar ( 1999) NA NA No No No No Yes No No They provide a conceptual model of channel 
member satisfaction using meta-analysis. 
Lewis and 
Lambert ( 1991) Develop 
Market Single Study Yes No No No Yes No No They present a model of the interrelationships 
between intermediary satisfaction, performance, 
and dependence. 
Our Study Emerging 
Market Multi-Study Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Various intermediary-product-market 
combinations have differential impacts on the manufacturer's performance. The alignment of intermediaries across different 
combinations increases both manufacturer 
profit and intermediary satisfaction.  
^if the paper uses one study or multiple studies to arrive at its main conclusions.  

 
13 
 A Comprehensive Analysis of the Role of In termediaries in Manufacturer Performance 
Given the dearth of research investigating impl ementable strategies to increase manufacturers’ 
profitability by managing intermediaries, we direct ly contact manufacturers and intermediaries to 
understand what they think can be done to fulfill the dual goal of increasing manufacturers’ profitability and intermediaries’ satisf action, as discussed in Study 1.  
Study 1 (Qualitative) 
The qualitative study aims to identify strategies that might help manufacturers increase 
profitability and intermediary satisfaction. With qua litative research, we attempted to generate themes 
to understand the required strategies ( Corley and Gioia 2011 ). We conducted “theoretical sampling” 
(Breckenridge and Jones 2009 ) to identify and recruit managers and intermediaries. Our selected 
respondents come from four industries (cons truction products, fast-moving consumer goods 
(FMCG), heavy machinery, and automobiles). The data for the qualitative study is collected in nine months.  
For the recruitment of managers, we initially contacted
5 60 managers6. A positive response 
was received from 29 (of the 60), to whom we have  applied three further screening criteria: 1) 
responsibility for managing intermediaries and, prefer ably, direct relationships (e.g., meeting, visiting, 
etc.) with the same; 2) at least 15 years’ experience in  managing a portfolio of  intermediaries, and 3) 
have the experience of operating in one or more  emerging markets. Further, we have tested the 
managers’ domain knowledge with two more global questions: 1) tenure of their work with their 
current portfolio of intermediaries, and 2)  tenure of being responsible for managing intermediaries in 
emerging markets. This approach helped us select proper informants ( Kumar, Stern and Anderson 
 
5 We contacted potential respondents by phone and email. 
6 To contact managers, we used information from three sources: (1) industry references suggested by two of the authors; (2) part icipants in an 
executive program in two premier business sc hools in India, and (3) references for al umni furnished by these two institutions.  

 
14 
 1993 ; Sharma et al. 2020 ). After applying these additional criteria, we ended up with 24 managers7 who 
participated in the qualitative interviews.  
As part of the selection process, we ensured that the intermediaries are 
dealing/distributing/wholesaling a specific ma nufacturer’s products by screening the 
contract/agreement/informal consent papers between the parties. We also confirmed this information 
with the manufacturers. We have obtained the list8 of intermediaries from 6 different manufacturers 
and also used the industry references of one of the authors9. We finally ended up with 29 intermediaries 
based in India, of which 10, 9, 5, and 5 re presented the construction products, FMCG, heavy 
machinery, and automobile industries, respectively. We note that 23 respondents spoke English, and 
6 respondents were recorded in Hindi and translated into English.  
Data collection and analysis 
After obtaining the managers’ and intermedi aries’ consent, we developed the interview 
protocol and recorded the respondents’ comments, ha ving assured them that confidentiality would be 
maintained. We conducted semi-structured interviews ( Gioia, Corley and Hamilton 2013 ). The 
interview protocols were modified to capture real -time responses and various emerging consensus10 
(Arsel 2017 ). A memo for each was prepared after one author and two independent coders separately 
evaluated all the interviews. Further, they prep ared themes considering the codes in the memo, 
compared them, and resolved any disagreements through discussion. We re-evaluated the themes on an ongoing basis through regular meetings ( Holloway and Beatty 2003 ; Besharov and Smith 2014 ; 
Borah, Prakhya and Sharma 2019 ).  
 
7 Of these, 72% were at the senior level (e.g., senior vice presidents, vice presid ents, general managers , deputy general manage rs, senior managers), 
and 28% were at mid-level (e.g., managers and deputy managers). Our sample containe d representatives from multiple countries, i ncluding India, 
Bangladesh, and Indonesia, comprising five, twelve, three, and four managers from th e construction products, FMCG, heavy machin ery, and 
automobile industries, respectively. 
8 The acquired list contained the business contact de tails of the proprietor, such as a dealer.  
9 We have contacted 150 intermediaries and have obtained a positive response from 42. Even  though we promised complete confident iality, 10 
intermediaries did not respond. Further, initial screening has for ced us to drop 3 intermediaries, as they have not submitted t he proper documents. 
10 For example, after interviewing five intermediaries, we realized  that intermediaries were not satisfied with manufacturers eve n when the latter 
provide tangible (e.g., discount) an d intangible (e.g., a foreign trip) benefits. This dissatisfaction was due to manufacturers ’ lack of rational behavior 
in many contexts (e.g., asking intermediaries to incr ease sales without a prope r understanding of demand). 

 
15 
 To ensure clarity in the coding strategies, we used template analysis ( King 2012 ) and first-order 
coding that uses raw data and allows us to create conceptual categories from the data ( Miles, 
Huberman and Saldaña 2014 ). We discovered vital data pat terns using first-order coding ( Marshall 
and Rossman 2014 ; Miles, Huberman and Saldaña 2014 ). We relied on second-order coding (which 
consisted of various combinati ons of first-order coding ( Braun and Clarke 2013 )) to generate themes 
representing the relationships with our research questions.  
Reliability and Validity 
Checking reliability and validity is a critical component of qualitative research. We used an 
innovative multi-step approach to test reliability and validity. In the first step, for those manufacturers 
with more than one respondent, we matched insights across respondents11 (Sharma et al. 2020). 
Second, we verified the insights for those organi zations represented by a single respondent by 
interacting with the firm. Third, reliability was es tablished by matching the themes generated by the 
author and the independent coders. With inter-cod er reliability of more than 94.33%, we achieved 
reliability. We presented our findings to five mana gers and six intermediaries from other industries 
(that is, industries not included in our study), who were asked to comment on our findings ( Birt et al. 
2016 ). We found that most of our themes were consid ered to be accurate, showcasing the validity of 
our findings.  
Identifying what a manufacturer ma y do to manage intermediaries 
As part of the protocol, we as ked a few open-ended questions to the participating managers: 
1) Are intermediaries important for your business? Do you have any specific intermediary management 
strategies (e.g., pay, trips, incentives, discounts, etc. )?; 2) Do intermediaries help you design strategies?, 
and 3) What do you think can be done to manage intermediaries?  
 
11 Within the industry, we found matched ideas, whereas we observed heterogeneity in insights across industry sectors. Such heter ogeneity is 
possible as manufacturer-intermediary relati onships have different characteristics ac ross industries; for example, the way a re lationship works in 
FMCG may not be the same in the construction products industry. 

 
16 
 Managers agreed that managing intermediaries are critical in rising competitive emerging 
markets. Citing the discussion in her board meeting, one respondent noted: “We have been talking about 
creating something new to manage our de alers. However, so far, we are relyin g on the same old st rategies: trips and 
discounts”  (FMCG industry). Discussing his ten years of direct relationships with channel 
intermediaries, one of the respondents from the heavy machinery industry mentioned that: “Dealers 
and distributors are very important to our business. We struggl e to manage them and see sign ificant attrition as well as 
lack of exclusiveness. We increased the incentives, which al so made us increase pressure. We so far did not see any 
significant improvement in our business” . A respondent from the automobile industry informed us that: 
“While managing dealers is very important for us, in many cases, dealers try to nego tiate the profit we offer. From context 
to context, we do compromise, but not on every occasion. This ma kes them unsupportive. We have lost a few as they 
could not reach the sales target.”   
Further, one respondent mentioned that: “ It is none of my business how they increase sales. Some of 
them sell products from other manufacturers . I tried to offer them a higher disco unt, but this does not work all the time” 
(FMCG industry). Regarding the strategies im plemented for intermediary management, one 
respondent informed us: “We do not have specific strategies to manage intermediaries apart from incentivizing them 
for their performance. But the market is  changing, and we may not be in benefits if we do  not adopt more effective 
strategies” (heavy machinery). Hence, the first theme from the qualitative study was the lack of proper 
intermediary management strategies.   
Commenting on whether intermediaries help desi gn strategies for effective management, a 
respondent from the construction product industry mentioned that: “Dealers helped me to identify what 
products go where. We had a mega-marke t share after following their advice.” Another manager responded:  
“Dealers, distributors, wholesalers, most  of the time do not want  to overstock although we  push it. Many times, 
distributors complained, stating that they cannot distribute as per the target as t here is no demand in his/her area. This 
is an indicator that the distributor is showing the problem in the distribution strategies. However, these insights are not 

 
17 
 fact/data-driven; therefore, we do no t entertain this type of insights” (FMCG industry). Supporting the notion 
that intermediaries are the information providers regarding what manufacturers should do to gain business from them, one respondent informed us: “Two years ago, multiple dealers from a specific area informed 
us to supply more of a specific prod uct and less of another product. We did not follow their suggestions and experienced 
de-growth in sales. After investigation, we  could learn that there was a shift in t he market they were operating, and they 
could sense the demand. Because of our deci sions, all the dealers in the specified re gion became dissatisfied, and we saw a 
4.6% decrease in sales and a 14% attrition of dealers.”  Hence, the second theme we learn was: 
intermediaries provide critical insights  that manufacturers largely overlook.  
Coming to the responses to our question regarding what managers think can be done to 
effectively manage intermediaries in such a wa y that a manufacturer’s profit increases and 
intermediaries are satisfied, one senior manager informed us: “We tried to research the market and could find 
that some dealers in some markets sell our low-priced prod uct heavily and not premier prod uct. This made us think if 
we only advise them to deal with the lo w-priced product such that they have en ough inventory, coul d suffice the market 
demand, less costs involved in storage, and distribute mo re. Could not implement it as top management was not ready”  
(construction product industry).  Another respondent noted:  “I think there is a need to understand what 
they can sell perfectly over  what they cannot. This is  lacking in our strategies” (construction product industry). 
Citing the relevance of data-driven dealer management strategies, one respondent said: “We lack 
understanding of what should be distri buted and how. We have comprehensiv e distribution strategies where each 
intermediary deals with each prod uct we offer. This is good. Bu t, what if a specific product category do not have required 
market demand. It is obvious that the deal ers will be mad as they lose business. One of the ways this  can be handled is 
identifying what goes where - which dealer  should deal with what product catego ry. This may be complex but can have 
very productive dealer management strategies”  (construction product industry). Another manager from the 
automobile industry supported this notion: “Days are gone where we could ha ve coercion with our channel 
members. We are also not in the days where a formal contract  can give us success. We can only be able to increase profits 

 
18 
 if we understand the intermediaries, deve lop relational governance where we can suggest to them what to do, and make 
sure they are satisfied and ma king profits for themselves.”  Finally, citing his own company, one respondent 
noted: “Reallocating resources across channels is not an active st rategy in my company. However, it is critical to align 
resources dynamically so that we can suggest  what to do when to the intermediaries” (FMCG) . Hence, the third 
theme here was that managers believe that a form of alignment of prod ucts with the 
intermediary types can help in crease manufacturers’ profit and intermediaries’ satisfaction.   
Identifying how intermediaries th ink they can be managed better 
Similar to the managers, as part  of the protocol, we asked a f ew open-ended questions to the 
participating intermediaries: 1) How do manufacture rs help you increase sa les and customer demand? 
and 2) In addition to the existing support to increa se sales offered by the manufacturers, what do you 
see as a major strategy that can help you increase sales? 
An intermediary dealing with construction products responded to our first question by stating: 
“Manufacturers push all the products. However, the market  I operate in does not accept all types of products. 
Manufacturers do not have an understanding of the fit of the product with the market. This does not help increase sales; 
rather, my business is heavily affected. T hey advertise products to increase demand . But it is not always advertising; the 
company should also look at the customers I have, their preferences, lifest yle, to increase sales”. Another intermediary 
dealing with FMCG products noted:  “Manufacturers offer various incentives:  cash, trip, products (cell phone, TV, 
etc.). I do not get them as I cannot reac h the target they ask for. If there is no customer for the product, how can I 
distribute more? Retailers that I work with come and complain to me, return the products. The incentives are meaningless 
for me”. We also got to know that price and incentives do  not play a big role as an intermediary can get 
similar price from the competing companie s. An FMCG intermediary mentioned, “ I have offers for the 
same price from the competing manufacturers. ” 
In response to our question  regarding additional strategies that manufacturers can adopt to 
manage intermediaries, one respondent informed us: “My motivation to push [X] company products is very 

 
19 
 much affected by the push I get. The company should know what  the market is looking for. Just developing products and 
pushing me to sell a bad (high priced or bad performance pr oduct) will not help. The company should learn where the 
alignment is” (construction product industry) . In contrast, an automobile dealer noted:  “Our company has 
distinctive strategies for me. They check the demand and acco rdingly adjust the price for the products with the market. I 
sold 23% more cars in the last month (never thought of it).  This alignment understanding is important for the company’s 
performance and my values and satisfaction”. 
Based on these responses, we learned that the sati sfaction of intermediaries is essential. Any 
strategies that can influence such satisfaction should  be implemented by the manufacturers, as can 
also be seen from one respondent’s comment about construction products: “I don't see company values 
my satisfaction. The salesperson comes and asks for the target. Unless I am happy, it is difficult to be motivated. The 
company needs to tell me what to sell to  whom and when. If my business is down  next quarter, I will take the dealership 
of another company”. 
Text Analysis 
In addition to the template analysis, we conducte d a text analysis exercise to deepen the 
qualitative study’s insights. In an organizational settin g, deriving values from unstructured textual data 
is critical as it can provide much-needed inform ation that is not available in structured data ( Müller et 
al. 2016 ). Information extracted from the textual data is  valuable for a range of enterprise applications 
and informed decision-making. Text analytics help s support insights from unstructured data, as well 
as from qualitative data. In our context, the use of  text analytics is relevant not only to validate the 
insights gained from template analysis of qualitative  data but also to identify potential economic value 
lying untapped, as revealed in the comments of the managers and intermediaries ( Ittoo and van den 
Bosch 2016 ; Abbas et al. 2018 ).  
 Given the importance of text analytics in ou r context, we analyzed the response of each 
manager and intermediary to each question and presen ted the insights for each question in terms of 

 
20 
 proximity plots12 (used to represent the distance from one or several keywords to others); a 
dendrogram (showing the hierarchical clustering that identifies themes); link analysis (a technique to 
evaluate the connections or relationships among wo rds using force-based graphs, multidimensional 
scaling, or circular graphs (nodes in a network of words))13, and a frequency table (which shows the 
frequency with which each keyword is used in the comments on each question in our data). We used 
WordStat for Stata, which allows text analytics technique s to be applied to any string variable stored 
in a Stata file14. 
Text analytics of the responses to the questi on “What do you think can be done to manage 
channel intermediaries?” shows that the keywords are alignment , market , products , dealers , and level; 
alignment is linked to products and market with va lues of .947 and .583, respectively, in the link 
analysis (see WA Figure 1 Panel A for link analys is; Panel B for dendrogram ; Panel C for proximity 
plot). WA Table A1, showing the frequency occurre nce of the keywords, clearly reveals that the 
alignment of intermediaries with the product and mark et types is considered to be a profitable strategy 
by managers. In response to the que stions, “Are intermediaries important for your business? Are there 
any specific intermediary management  strategies you have (e.g., pay, trips, incentive, discount, etc.)?”, 
the keyword lack is associated with tools and strategies  with values of .524 and .476, respectively (see WA 
Figure 2 Panel A for link analysis; Panel B for de ndrogram). These insights support those derived 
from template analysis, where we find that manu facturers lack proper intermediary management 
strategies.  
Text analysis of the responses to intermedia ry questions regarding how manufacturers keep 
intermediaries motivated to increase sales shows that  manufacturers provide benefits in the form of 
trips, products, incentives, and luxury gifts (see WA Figure 3 Panel A for link analysis; Panel B for 
 
12 https://provalisresearch.com/products/conten t-analysis-software/wordstat-screenshots/  
13 https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/computer-science/link-analysis  
14 https://provalisresearch.com/products/conten t-analysis-software/wordstat-for-stata/  

 
21 
 dendrogram; WA Table A2 for frequency count). Sim ilarly, analysis of responses to the question 
“What do you see as a major strategy that can help you increase sales?” shows that alignment with markets and products may help intermediaries to improve their performance and impact manufacturers’ performance (see WA Figure 4 Pane l A for link analysis; Panel B for dendrogram; 
Panel C for proximity plot; WA Table A3 for frequen cy count). Again, the text analysis of intermediary 
responses provides insights that are consisten t with the findings of the template analysis.
15  
Summary of the qualitative study:  The qualitative research (based on both the template 
analysis and text analytics) yielded three significant insights. First, insights from the managers suggest 
that it is crucial to managing intermediaries to boost performance. While managers acknowledge that 
they do not have any distinct strategies to manage intermediaries, they emphasize that some form of 
alignment at the intermediary-, product-, and market-type levels may be beneficial to both 
manufacturers and intermediaries. Second, intermedi aries think that manufacturers must dynamically 
know what to sell, where to sell, and through whom  to trade. Intermediaries expect strategic advice 
about the alignment that can impact both manu facturers and themselves. Finally, intermediary 
satisfaction is a critical result of intermediary management strategies, and manufacturers should 
attempt to implement policies that can increase such  satisfaction to improve their long-term profits. 
While not all findings from Study 1 are novel as li terature is clear that intermediaries need to be 
managed to boost performance, about co-ordinat ion of selling efforts, and about intermediary 
satisfaction; the novel insight is about the strategi es (i.e., aligning products and markets with the 
intermediaries) that a manufacturer should follow to enhance its profitability and intermediary satisfaction.  
 
Theoretical Background 
 
15 We would like to thank an anonymous reviewer  for directing us to use text analysis t ools along with template analysis in our S tudy 1.  

 
22 
 We build on Ghosh and John’s (1999) GVA model to  argue that alignment may be a profitable 
strategy. GVA model emphasizes value maximization an d cost minimization in an inter-organizational 
relationship (e.g., manufacturer-intermediary) ( Chung, Chatterjee and Sengupta 2012 ) by positioning 
a “three-way fit among  (1) resources, (2) specific investments, and (3) governance that yields the 
highest net receipts.”(Ghosh and John, 2005, pg . 347). GVA framework shows the necessity of 
alignment of resources, investment, and governance that may affect the perfor mance of an exchange 
relationship (i.e., manufacturer-intermediary). Ever y organization forms goals; such goal setting and 
achievement of the same need resources, investments, and governance. GVA model allows us to theorize the goal setting and performance (i.e., manufacturer profitability and intermediary satisfaction) by aligning resources, investment, and governance.   
When it comes to manufacturer-intermediary relati onships, it is well known that a firm with a 
higher profit motivation attempts to devise strategies  that can be helpful for shared value, regardless 
of power and resource differentials. The nature  of the governance dictates the value that a 
manufacturer may obtain from intermediaries, which is the essence of the GVA model. Appropriate 
governance not only supports the profit agenda of the manufacturer but also increases the intermediaries’ performance, creating  current and future joint values ( Williamson 1996 ; Ghosh and 
John 2005 ). Profit-motivated firms not only undertake value-creating investments (e.g., developing 
valued products, having geographical reach and divers ification, competitive pricing, relationship with 
channel partners, etc.) but also engage in value-claimi ng activities (e.g., suggestions for doing business 
in specific ways that can increase value) ( Jap 2001 )  backed by robust governance (e.g., a healthy 
relationship). However, to maximize the benefits of the resources, a firm should have specific 
investment and governance strategies.  
In our context, manufacturers own various resources, including products, operations in 
multiple markets, and intermediaries. These interme diaries provide a manufacturer with much-needed 

 
23 
 insights about the market, as reflected in the qualitat ive study. Under healthy governance, if the specific 
investment by manufacturers is directed towards un derstanding the capability of intermediaries to sell 
certain products in certain markets effectively (which is related to the value gained from the governance), a manufacturer’s profit motive may be successful. Such values (in the form of alignment 
and resource contributions) on the part of manufactu rers result in information-sharing, trust, and 
credibility, thereby reducing monitoring, coordi nating, and enforcement costs and increasing 
manufacturer profitability (Chung et al., 2012). This is critical as a manufacturer deals with various 
product and market types, which each intermediary may not be able to deal with effectively.  
Further, as the natures of products, markets, and intermediaries are different, their alignment 
might have heterogeneous effects on manufacturers’ profit ( Nickerson, Hamilton and Wada 2001 ; 
Ghosh and John 1999 ). Moreover, when a manufacturer manages multi-product, multi-market, and 
multi-intermediary set-up, an alignment can help  govern the exchange relationships such that 
resources are properly utilized, and specific investments are directed towards achieving the goals. Hence, building on the GVA model’s tenets, we argu e that the alignment of intermediaries with 
product and market types is expected to have diff erential effects on a manufacturer’s profitability. 
However, given the scarcity of empirical ev idence regarding the impact of alignment on 
manufacturers’ profitability, in Study 2, we empirica lly explore the potential relationship between the 
alignment of intermediaries with the market and prod uct types that may affect manufacturers’ profit.  
Study 2: Empirical Investigation 
Study 1 suggests, and the GVA model supports  that the distribution alignment of the 
intermediary (such as dealer, retailer, institutiona l buyer, etc.), product (such as premium vs. non-
premium), and market types (such as urban, rural vs. semi-urban, etc.) may benefit a manufacturer and 
its intermediaries. Hence, in Study 2, we link vari ous combinations of intermediary, product, and 
market types to the manufacturer's profitability through an empirical investigation.  

 
24 
 Data 
We use data from a construction product manufact urer operating in India that distributes its 
products through two types of intermediaries: dealers and institutional buyers. We observe 
intermediaries that are located in three market ty pes: urban, rural, and semi-urban. Further, the 
intermediaries deal with two product types with th e same functionality: a premium product, which has 
a premium price and quality; and a non-premium prod uct, which has a lower price and quality. The 
data has information about the number of dealer s and institutional buyers that the manufacturer 
manages in each market and the types of products ea ch intermediary deals with over 37 months (April 
2016 to April 2019). We also observe information about the manufacturer’s monthly revenue for each 
combination of intermediary, product, and market type16.  
Further, we obtain information on the total mo nthly units of competing products in the 
market distributed by the competitors, monthly m onetary discounts offered by the manufacturer to 
its intermediaries, and monthly pr oduct prices (for both premium and non-premium products). Also, 
we are provided (by the manufacture r) the average monthly variable costs of the raw materials used 
for production. We collect additional information on India’s GDP growth, the consumption expenditure of customers, diesel prices, and the length of railroads in India. Table 2 provides the 
descriptive statistics (mean and standard deviation in  parenthesis) of the distribution levels; revenues 
(in millions); average discounts offered by the ma nufacturer (per intermediary); and price of the 
construction products (per ton) across various comb inations of the market, intermediary, and product 
types in our data. We also include two additional in dustry-specific variables: electricity use and fuel 
(e.g., coal, gas) consumption as additional control variables.  
Table 2:  Descriptive Statistics 
Market Intermediary Type Product Distribution Re venue (in millions) Discount^ Price (per ton) 
Urban Dealer Premium 9894 (4754) 594.51 (283.81) 3946 (953) 6440 (1074) 
Urban Dealer Non-premium 11975 (3170)  763.93 (209.18) 4519 (1130) 5988 (1000) 
 
16 We observe 37 months of revenue of 12 market-intermediary-product combinations. He nce, our estimation sample has 37 x 12 = 444  observations. 

 
25 
 Urban Institutional Buye r Premium 53 (59) 5.65 (6.57) 0 (0) 4778 (1231) 
Urban Institutional Buye r Non-premium 2804 (1374) 267. 48 (136.2) 0 (0) 4848 (821) 
Rural Dealer Premium 5015 (1963) 254.91 (105.0) 3330 (975) 6309 (1052) 
Rural Dealer Non-premium 6106 (1417)  311.93 (78.4) 3666 (1133) 5886 (984) 
Rural Institutional Buye r Premium 295 (276) 31.67 (30.8) 0 (0) 4585 (805) 
Rural Institutional Buye r Non-premium 3722 (977) 310. 55 (77.4) 0 (0) 4725 (794) 
Semi-Urban Dealer Premium 6636 ( 2049) 477.35 (152.6) 4495 (1252) 6501 (1085) 
Semi-Urban Dealer Non-premium 6115 (1435) 407.77 (108.5) 4614 (1376) 6026 (1007) 
Semi-Urban Institutional Buyer Premiu m 662 (559) 66.13 (55. 2) 0 (0) 4384 (980) 
Semi-Urban Institutional Buyer Non-prem ium 3027 (779) 312.83 (80. 9) 0 (0) 4695 (838) 
Note: The numbers in the parentheses are the standard deviation.^calculate d based on average quantity (tons) of 
products dealt with.  
Model 
With the observed data, to understand the role of intermediaries on manufacturer revenue, we 
use a linear regression framework to model the fo cal manufacturer’s monthly revenue (in a million 
Rupees) for each product type (premium and non-pr emium) within each market (urban, rural, and 
semi-urban), and intermediary type (dealers and inst itutional buyers) as a function of both the focal 
and the competing product’s i) distribution level (number of intermediaries); ii) average monthly 
discount offered per intermediary by the manufact urer; and iii) additional controls, specifically month 
dummies, GDP growth in India, consumption expend iture in India (in billion Rupees), competing 
manufacturers’ total product distribution in the corresponding market-intermediary combination (in 
millions), electricity used, and fuel consumption. 
Since it is critical to understand the re venue asymmetries among different market-, 
intermediary-, and product-type combinations, we use market-channel intermediary-product fixed 
effects (urban, rural, semi-urban markets x dealers, institutional buyers x premium product, non-premium product = 12 fixed effects). These fixed eff ects inherently capture the quality of the products 
along with the attractiveness of markets  and intermediary types for consumers
17.  
Further, since our focus of interest is to unde rstand the asymmetries in the effectiveness of 
distribution in each market-cha nnel intermediary-product combinat ion, we allow the corresponding 
 
17 We also estimate a specification with dummies for market type (urban and rural), premium product, and dealer channel. The prop osed 
specification with market-intermediary-product fixed effects outperforms this alternative specification based on the R2 criteria. 

 
26 
 response parameter to be combination-specific as well. Consequently, our implementation allows us 
to capture heterogeneity not only in the baseline re venues (through our fixed effect specification) but 
also in the revenue response to distribution (th rough market-intermediary-product-specific response 
parameters). Accordingly, our regre ssion equation becomes the following: 
𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒 ௠,௖,௝,௧ൌ𝛼௠,௖,௝൅𝛽௠,௖,௝𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ௠,௖,௝,௧൅𝛾𝑋௠,௖,௝,௧൅𝜀௠,௖,௝,௧,   (1) 
where m={urban, rural, semi-urban} , c={dealer, institutional buyer} , j={premium, non-premium} , t is 
time/month, 𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒 ௠,௖,௝,௧ (in million Rupees) and 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ௠,௖,௝,௧ are respectively the revenue 
and distribution of product j in market m through intermediary c in month t, and 𝑋௠,௖,௝,௧ is a vector of 
controls including month dummies, 𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑒  𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 ௠,௖,௝,௧, 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ௠,௖,ି௝,௧, 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒௠,௖,ି௝,௧, 
𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑒  𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 ௠,௖,ି௝,௧18,  𝐺𝐷𝑃  𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑡ℎ ௧, 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛  𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 ௧ (in a billion Rupees), 
𝐸𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦  𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑௧, 𝐹𝑢𝑒𝑙  𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ௧, 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛  𝑜𝑓 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑠 ௧ (in 
millions)19. 
Endogeneity 
Since the manufacturer makes marketing-mix decisions other than distribution, and these 
decisions are potentially correlated with the dist ribution decision and the outcome variable (i.e., 
revenue), we have a potential endogeneity problem. In other words, we may not be able to infer the 
magnitude of the distribution response parameters correctly without controlling for the endogeneity problem with valid instruments. Accordingly, we id entify two instruments: monthly diesel price and 
length of railroads in India over time. Our rationale  in the choice of these instruments is as follows. 
As diesel prices drop, the manufacturer’s dist ribution costs are expected to decrease, implying 
opportunities to distribute to a larger number of intermediaries. Whereas, customers are less likely to 
 
18 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ௠,௖,ି௝,௧, 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒௠,௖,ି௝,௧, and 𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑒  𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 ௠,௖,ି௝,௧ are the competing product’s distribution,  price and store discount, respectively. 
19 We would like to note that we do not account for the price of th e focal product as a control variable since our dependent vari able (i.e., revenue) 
is a function of the focal product’s price. Hence, the use of pr ice as a control might be concep tually problematic in our setti ng. That being said, as 
we discuss in our Model Robustnes s Section, we estimate an alternative model with the price (after controlling for the potentia l price endogeneity 
problem) as a robustness check and find that both our proposed mode l and this alternative specification yields the same adjuste d R2 value of 0.996. 
Thus, we decide to stick to our proposed specification without the price (of the focal product) as a control. The reasoning beh ind the use of price as 
an additional control variable in the robustn ess analysis is that the manufacturer gene rates a stream of revenue from fees of t he godown, contract, 
and freight in addition to the revenue gene rated from the sales of its products (that is  a direct function of price). Hence, th e overall revenue (i.e., 
our dependent variable) is not necessarily a direct function of price; rather, the pri ce is just one of the components of the r evenue calculation. 

 
27 
 be affected in their purchase decisions by lower diesel prices, implying no significant changes in 
revenue levels. The use of diesel prices as an instru ment to control for distribution endogeneity is also 
consistent with the literature ( Sharma, Kumar and Cosguner 2019 ). Regarding our second instrument, 
as railroad availability increases, distribution cost s are expected to decrease for the manufacturer, 
implying higher levels of distribution. Similar to the argument made above, it is hard to expect a 
significant change in revenues as the length of ra ilroads changes. We use th e control function approach 
(Petrin and Train 2010 ), whereby we run a first step regression in which we model market-
intermediary-product-level distribution as a fun ction of market-intermediar y-product-level fixed 
effects, diesel prices, and length of railroads. 
Results 
The first step regression results ar e provided in Table 3. As can be  seen, the first step regression 
yields an R2 value of 0.908, suggesting that the instru ments capture a significant variation in the 
endogenous distribution variable. Besides, we find that  the coefficient for the length of railroads is 
highly significant. As expected, as railroads become  more prevalent in India, the distribution of the 
products gets easier, implying an increase in distri bution levels as well. That said, our results yield an 
insignificant relationship between diesel prices and distribution levels.  
Table 3 : First Step Regression (Distribution Endogeneity) 
Variables Estimates Std. Errors 
Intercept -91.88*** 26.80 
Diesel Price 0.0104 0.0136 
Length of Rail Lines 0.0015*** 0.0004 
R_Square: 0.908,  Adjusted R2=0.905 
Note:  Estimates with ***, **, and * are signif icant at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively . Estimates and standard errors are 
reported in thousands. Market-intermediary-product dummies are included in the model, but not reported to save space. 
 
We use the residuals from the first step regre ssion as an additional variable and embed them 
into Equation 1 to control for the potential endogeneity of the distribution. The second step regression results are provided in Table 4. As can be seen, the results suggest that the R
2 of the regression model 
is 0.996, implying that our independent variables properly explain the variation in the manufacturer’s 

 
28 
 revenue over time. The results suggest that there are significant revenue asymmetries among different 
market-intermediary-product combinations. For exampl e, the combination of dealer channel, urban 
market, and premium product (the institutional cha nnel, semi-urban market, premium product) brings 
the highest (lowest) baseline revenue among all 12 combinations. Results suggest that revenues are higher during the spring season (March to June). As expected, the price of competing products has a 
significant positive impact on revenue. Results also suggest that the manufacturer discount to increase 
sales is effective in increasing revenues, and, lastly, that most of our additional controls are significant. 
Table 4:  Revenue Estimation with and without Price 
 Proposed Model Alternative Model with Price 
Variables Estimates Std. Errors Estimates Std. Errors 
Fixed Effect–Urban/Dealer/Pr emium 243.5* 140. 2 673.344*** 242.837 
Fixed Effect–Urban/Dealer/N on-Premium 217.3 157.1 614.983** 241.036 
Fixed Effect–Urban/Ins titutional/Premium 303.6** 119 551.513*** 164.569 
Fixed Effect–Urban/Ins titutional/Non-Premium 270.6** 110.1 536.82*** 164.455 
Fixed Effect–Rural/D ealer/Premium 230.9 ** 112.9 629.244*** 215.488 
Fixed Effect–Rural/D ealer/Non-Premium 221. 1* 116.8 584.987*** 203.845 
Fixed Effect–Rural/Institutional/P remium 312.7*** 118.1 545.314*** 159.053 
Fixed Effect–Rural/Institutional/N on-Premium 345.6*** 110.7 605.151*** 162.560 
Fixed Effect–Semi-Urba n/Dealer/Premium 221.2* 119.8 643.569*** 228.417 
Fixed Effect–Semi-Urba n/Dealer/Non-Premium 204.9* 116 582.443*** 208.580 
Fixed Effect–Semi-Urban/Institutio nal/Premium 304*** 116.1 520.088*** 152.355 
Fixed Effect–Semi-Urban/Institutional/ Non-Premium 356.6***  111.4 611.267*** 161.784 
February 11.89* 6.37 9.15 6.465 
March 41.3*** 6.426 44.126*** 6.531 
April 48.03*** 7.442 51.573*** 7.583 
May 43.22*** 7.649 49.459*** 8.198 
June 48.7*** 7.674 57.259*** 8.645 
July 23.06*** 7.779 31.039*** 8.660 
August 18.89** 9.162 25.422*** 9.682 
September 20.83** 8.285 31.165*** 9.577 
October 25.6*** 9.506 28.422*** 9.610 
November 20.23** 9.990 26.629** 10.438 
December 16.21* 9.536 18.553* 9.584 
Price   -0.088** 0.040 
Discount Per intermediary 0.012*** 0.004 0.012*** 0.004 
Competing Product's Distribution -0.003*** 0.001 -0.003*** 0.001 
Competing Product's Price 0.007*** 0.002 0.006*** 0.002 
Competing Product's Disc ount Per intermediary -0.009** 0.004 -0.009** 0.004 
Price Residual   0.088** 0.040 
Distribution Residual -0.003 0.013 0.001 0.013 
Consumption Expenditure -0.052 0.076 0.022 0.083 
GDP Growth -31.36*** 11.130 -28.778** 11.151 
Distribution of Competing Products 37.04*** 13.840 43.098*** 14.056 
Power Used -0.084 0.089 -0.08 0.089 

 
29 
 Fuel -0.193*** 0.065 -0.153** 0.067 
Distribution–Urban/Dealer/Premi um 0.062*** 0.013 0.058*** 0.013 
Distribution–Urban/Dealer/Non-Pr emium 0.066*** 0. 013 0.062*** 0.013 
Distribution–Urban/Institutio nal/Premium 0. 102 0.077 0.102 0.077 
Distribution–Urban/Institutional/N on-Premium 0.104***  0.014 0.1*** 0.014 
Distribution–Rural/Dealer/Pre mium 0.055*** 0.013 0.05*** 0.013 
Distribution–Rural/Dealer/Non-Pr emium 0.054*** 0.013 0.05*** 0.013 
Distribution–Rural/Institutional/ Premium 0.088*** 0.02 0.082*** 0.021 
Distribution–Rural/Institutional/N on-Premium 0.071*** 0.014 0.066*** 0.014 
Distribution–Semi-Urban/Dealer/Pr emium 0.075*** 0. 013 0.071*** 0.013 
Distribution–Semi-Urban/Dealer/Non- Premium 0.072*** 0.013 0.068*** 0.013 
Distribution–Semi-Urban/Institutional /Premium 0.101*** 0.015 0.097*** 0.015 
Distribution–Semi-Urban/Institutional /Non-Premium 0.085***  0.014 0.08*** 0.014 
 R2=0.996, Adjusted R2=0.996 R2=0.996, Adjusted R2=0.996 
Note:  Estimates with ***, **, and * are signif icant at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. 
 
Going back to our main focus of interest, name ly the effect of dist ribution on revenues, we 
find significant asymmetries across the market, intermediary, and product types. Regarding market types, the results suggest that increasing the number of intermediaries in a rural market is less effective than doing so in either urban or semi-urban markets. Regarding intermediary types, increasing the number of institutional buyers is more effective in  revenue generation than increasing the number of 
dealers. Lastly, regarding product types, increasing  the number of intermediaries carrying the premium 
product brings more revenue than doing the same  for the non-premium product, except in the urban 
market. These asymmetries in the effectiveness of distribution (across different market-intermediary-
product combinations) motivated us to quantify the revenue impact of the rea llocation of distribution 
resources across various market-intermediary-product co mbinations. To that end, we first predict the 
revenues of each market-intermediary-channel comb ination at the average levels of our controls. 
Then, we subtract one outlet from each combination and move it to the remaining combinations (one combination at a time) and calculate the predicted re venue changes. Table 5 reports the results of this 
exercise. 
Table 5:  Revenue Impact of Reallocating Distribution Resources in the Supply-side 
  Urban Rural Semi-Urban 
 Dealer Institutional Dealer Inst itutional Dealer Institutional 
Impact in 1000 rupees. High Low High Low High Low High Low High Low High Low 

 
30 
  
Table 5 suggests that: 1) within each intermediary-product type combination, moving one 
intermediary from the urban and semi-urban markets to the rural market can increase revenue by 8k 
to 33.7k Rupees (see blue-colored  cells); 2) within each market-in termediary combination, converting 
the intermediary from premium-product-carrying to non-premium-product-carrying can increase 
revenue by -17.2k to 3.7k Rupees (see green-color ed cells), and 3) within each market-product-type 
combination, moving from a dealership to an in stitutional buyer can increase revenue by 12.4k to 
39.5k Rupees (see red-colored cells). Once we ha d quantified the revenue impacts of potential 
distribution reallocation decisions, we communicated th is information to the managers of the data-
providing manufacturer. The manufacturer communicated the insights to the intermediaries and persuaded them to implement the recommended chan ges in their operations. We discuss this field 
implementation next.  
Study 3: Field Implementation 
In Study 3, we intend to implement the insights gained from Study 2 to show that empirical 
insights can guide managerial decision-making. With Study 3, we aim to answer a) whether alignment 
increases the manufacturer’s profitability; b) whether  alignment increases intermediaries’ satisfaction; 
c) whether alignment causes an increase in dealers’ satisfaction, and d) whethe r the dealers’ satisfaction 
is related to manufacturers’ profitability. Accordingl y, our field implementation in Study 3 consists of 
four parts, as we discuss next.  Urban Dealer Premium 0 3.7 39.5 41.8 -7.8 -8.8 25.3 8.1 12.8 9.9 39 22.2 
Urban Dealer  Non- Premium -4 0 35.8 38.1 -11.6 -12.5 21.6 4. 4 9.1 6.1 35.2 18.5 
Urban Inst.  Premium -40 -35.8 0 2.3 -47.4 -48.4 -14.2 -31.4 -26.7 -29.7 -0.6 -17.3 
Urban Inst.  Non- Premium -42 -38.1 -2.3 0 -49.7 -50.7 -16.5 -33.7 -29 -32 -2.9 -19.6 
Rural Dealer  Premium 8 11.6 47.4 49.7 0 -1 33.2 16 20.7 17.7 46.8 30.1 
Rural Dealer  Non- Premium 9 12.5 48.4 50.7 1 0 34.1 16.9 21.7 18.7 47.8 31 
Rural Inst.  Pr emium -25 -21.6 14.2 16.5 -33.2 -34.1 0 -17.2 -12.5 -15.5 13.6 -3.1 
Rural Inst.  Non- Premium -8 -4.4 31.4 33.7 -16 -16.9 17.2 0 4.7 1.8 30.8 14.1 
Semi-U. Dealer  Premium -13 -9.1  26.7 29 -20.7 -21.7 12.5 -4.7 0 -3 26.1 9.4 
Semi-U. Dealer  Non- Premium -10 -6.1  29.7 32 -17.7 -18.7 15.5 -1.8 3 0 29.1 12.4 
Semi-U. Inst. Premium -39 -35.2 0.6 2.9 -46.8 -47.8 -13.6 -30.8 -26.1 -29.1 0 -16.7 
Semi-U. Inst. Non- Premium -22 -18.5 17.3 19.6 -30.1 -31 3.1 -14. 1 -9.4 -12.4 16.7 0 

 
31 
 In the first part of our field implementation, we have communicated the findings from Study 
2 and have recommended the manufacturer to inform the intermediaries of the need for alignment and provide strategic advice to implement the insigh ts based on our supply-side reallocation exercise. 
Accordingly, we have communicated how reallocating  one unit of distribution from one combination 
to other combinations can affect the manufacturer’s revenue (as seen in Table 5). The manufacturer, 
having a national presence, has administrative  and technical difficulties implementing the 
recommendations throughout the country and ha s selected a specific region for the field 
implementation. The manufacturer has strategically advised on the findings from Study 2 and has recommended changes to operational modalities, that is, dealing and stocking more units of a product 
type aligned with a specific intermediary and market  type. The manufacturer has made intermediaries 
aware of the changes through its sales force and ensured that they follow the recommendations, then 
evaluated the impact of the implementation from the revenue and profit of that region at the end of 
the six-month: May 2019 to October 2019.
20 Regarding the internal validity of our field 
implementation, we would like to note that 1) the manufacturer has not changed its marketing and allied strategies during the time of the field implemen tation (even at the national level); 2) there is no 
significant changes in the construction product mark et, and 3) there is no change in the number of 
intermediaries in the specific region or product types marketed in that region. As seen in Table 6, the 
field implementation has generated substantive pe rformance results for the manufacturer, which 
experienced a 14% (13%) increase in its revenue (profit) from the corresponding region during the 
 
20 In certain seasons, such as fall and spring (between August a nd November, and February and Ap ril), construction businesses obs erve a demand 
lift due to favorable environmental conditio ns. First, we would like to note that the field implementation is done based on the  insights from Study 
2, where we already account for seasonality. That being said, in  our case, the manufacturer’s field implementation covers two 6 -month blocks, both 
of which are expected to include potentia l demand lifts due to seasonality. Accordingl y, we believe that the seasonality should  not change the 
profit/revenue impact of our di stribution reallocation recommendations qualitatively.  To confirm that our belief is accurate, w e have consulted the 
manufacturer and asked them how the numbers  would change if seasonality is accounted  for. Their back-of-the-envelope calculatio n suggests that 
the recommended intermediary r ealignment is expected to increase the manufactur er’s profit (revenue) by 8.69% to 17.11% (9.36% to 13.99%) 
even after accounting for the pot ential impact of seasonality. 

 
32 
 relevant six-month window, which can be attributed  to the alignment of th e intermediary, product, 
and market types. 
Table 6:  Results-Field Implementation 
 
 
 
In the second part of our implementation, we have asked the manufacturer to survey 
satisfaction levels among the dealers regarding 1) sa tisfaction with the manufacturer’s service, and (2) 
satisfaction due to increases in sales. The manufa cturer has surveyed satisfaction levels before and 
after recommending the strategic alig nment. Dealer satisfaction is evaluated using a Likert scale where 
1 = dissatisfied, and 7 = satisfied. A comparis on of satisfaction levels before and after the 
recommended implementation shows a 7.71% increase in  the average level of dealer satisfaction level 
due to implementing the recommended strategic alignment. 
In the third part of our implementation, we comp are two dealer groups’ satisfaction levels: 1) 
a treatment group that received strategic advice on alignment, and 2) a cont rol group that did not 
receive the advice. This comparison is made to suppor t the insight that dealer satisfaction is due to 
the alignment. The control group dealers are from a different region, whose geodemographic 
characteristics have a 76% match with that of the treatment region (i.e., the region where the 
implementation was conducted). Note that the c ontrol group intermediaries have a one-to-one 
matching (pair-level) with treatment group intermediar ies in terms of the products they deal with, the 
market they operate in, and the intermediaries’ size. Geodemographic characteristics (which are 
included to assess the match) are the average income  level of the customers, the potential demand for 
the products (investigated) in the market, the averag e size of the intermediaries, the population in the 
regions, number of active builders and developers, and consumption of the investigated products in 
the regions over the past year.  Performance Difference(pre-post) 
Manufacturer Revenue 14% Increase  
Manufacturer Profit  13% Increase  
Intermediary Satisfaction 7.71% Increase 

 
33 
 Regarding the match, some of the insights are provided by the focal manufacturer in terms of 
percentage match. We have then taken the character istics, looked at the mean values, and compared 
them using a similarity index, finding that 24% of the mismatches occurred mainly due to the 
population, average income of consumers, and the nu mber of active builders and developers. We have 
validated the match/non-match index with the focal manufacturer. Based on the data provided by the latter, we find that the treatment group dealer s experienced, on average, a 7.29% increase in 
satisfaction than the control group dealers.  
In the fourth and last part of our implementati on, to contribute to the intermediary satisfaction 
stream of literature, we link back dealer satisf action with manufacturer performance. We find a 
positive and significant relationship, indicating that dealer satisfacti on is critical for a manufacturer’s 
profitability ( β=.00263, p<.05). One of the ways to increase this satisfaction is to manage an effective 
strategic alignment between de alers and a manufacturer.  
Model Robustness 
To check the robustness of our proposed model, we estimate two alternative models. In our first robustness check, we incorporate the price of the focal product as an additional control into our proposed model and account for price endogeneity.  We strictly follow the existing literature ( Papies, 
Ebbes and Van Heerde 2017 ; Bombaij and Dekimpe 2019 ) to identify a potential instrument for price 
and the arguments for using it. We use the cost of raw materials as our instrument, in line with the 
extant literature ( Cosguner, Chan and Seetharaman 2018 ). We argue that raw material costs should 
not directly affect a manufacturer’s revenue, but the e ffect is realized through price. Increases in the 
cost of raw material are expected to  increase prices but should not affect the sales of products. As 
seen from the results for price endogeneity co rrection presented in Table 7, raw material costs 
positively affect the price of products with an R2 value of 0.404.  

 
34 
 The estimates of the second step regression (i.e.,  the alternative model with price) are provided 
in Table 4. As evident from Table 4, the residuals’ coefficients from the first step regression for the 
price is also significant. Further, the correspond ing price response parameter becomes significant and 
negative once the price endogeneity problem is controlled. All these suggest that it is essential to control for the potential endogeneity problem in th e price variable to recover the corresponding price 
response parameter precisely. That being said, resu lts in Table 4 suggest that our proposed model 
(without price) and this alternative specification yield identical adjusted R
2 values of 0.996. Thus, we 
retain our proposed specification without the pri ce variable rather than using the alternative 
specification with the price variable. 
Table 7:  First Step Regression (Price Endogeneity)  
Variables Estimates Std. Errors 
Intercept 5.84*** 0.33 
Raw Material Cost 0.0006** 0.0003 
R_Square: 0.404,  Adjusted R2=0.387 
Note: Estimates with ***, **, and * are significant at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. Estimate s and standard errors are 
reported in thousands. Market-intermediary-product dummies are included in the model, but not reported to save space. 
 
As a second robustness analysis, we estimate a non-linear model with quadratic distribution 
terms at the intermediary-market-product type leve ls. See the “Alternative Model with Quadratic 
Distribution” column of Table 8 for this specificati on. The results suggest that 10 of the 12 response 
parameters (for the quadratic terms) are statistically insignificant at the 5% level. Further, the linear 
effects of distribution remain qualitatively similar to  the proposed specification. Lastly, the alternative 
specification yields an identical adjusted R2 value as the proposed model (0.996). Hence, due to its 
parsimony, we retain our proposed specification for the rest of our analysis.  
Table 8:  Revenue Estimation with and without th e Square of the Distribution Variable 
 Proposed Model Alternative Model with 
Quadratic Distribution 
Variables Estimates Std. Errors Estimates Std. Errors 
Discount Per intermediary 0.012*** 0.004 0.01** 0.004 
Competing Product's Distribution -0.003*** 0.001 -0.003*** 0.001 
Competing Product's Price 0.007*** 0.002 0.006*** 0.002 
Competing Product's Disc ount Per intermediary -0.009** 0.004 -0.009** 0.004 
Distribution Residual -0.003 0.013 -0.019 0.013 

 
35 
 Consumption Expenditure -0.052 0.076 -0.109 0.075 
GDP Growth -31.36*** 11.130 -25.5** 10.930 
Distribution of Competing Products 37.04*** 13.840 44.29*** 13.930 
Power Used -0.084 0.089 -0.064 0.089 
Fuel -0.193*** 0.065 -0.215*** 0.064 
Distribution–Urban/Dealer/Pre mium 0.062*** 0.013 0.074*** 0.013 
Distribution–Urban/Dealer/Non- Premium 0.066***  0.013 0.084*** 0.014 
Distribution–Urban/Institut ional/Premium 0.102 0.077 0.288 0.215 
Distribution–Urban/Institutional/ Non-Premium 0.104 *** 0.014 0.11*** 0.017 
Distribution–Rural/Dealer/Pre mium 0.055*** 0.013 0.058*** 0.015 
Distribution–Rural/Dealer/Non- Premium 0.054***  0.013 0.073*** 0.018 
Distribution–Rural/Institutio nal/Premium 0. 088*** 0.02 0.087 0.061 
Distribution–Rural/Institutional/ Non-Premium 0.071 *** 0.014 0.151*** 0.027 
Distribution–Semi-Urban/Dealer/ Premium 0.075*** 0.013 0.074*** 0.016 
Distribution–Semi-Urban/Dealer/N on-Premium 0.072*** 0.013 0.085*** 0.018 
Distribution–Semi-Urban/Institution al/Premium 0.101*** 0.015 0.139*** 0.027 
Distribution–Semi-Urban/Institution al/Non-Premium 0.085 *** 0.014 0.227*** 0.031 
Distribution Square–Urban /Dealer/Premium   0.237 0.160 
Distribution Square–Urban/Dea ler/Non-Premium   -0.056 0.274 
Distribution Square–Urban/Ins titutional/Premium   -927.1 977.800 
Distribution Square–Urban/Institutional/Non-Premium   1.898 1.683 
Distribution Square–Rural /Dealer/Premium   1.331 0.886 
Distribution Square–Rural/Dea ler/Non-Premiu m   -0.235 1.029 
Distribution Square–Rural/Institutional/Premium   17.95 74.500 
Distribution Square–Rural/Institu tional/Non-Premium   -9.232*** 3.281 
Distribution Square–Semi-Urba n/Dealer/Premium   1.254* 0.695 
Distribution Square–Semi-Urban/ Dealer/Non-Premium   0.347 1.059 
Distribution Square–Semi-Urban/In stitutional/Prem ium   -13.82 14.400 
Distribution Square–Semi- Urban/Institutional/Non- Premium   -23.15*** 4.890 
 R2=0.996, Adjusted R2=0.996 R2=0.996, Adjusted R2=0.996 
Note: Estimates with ***, **, and * are significant at 1%, 5%, and 10% , respectively. The distribution squares are measured in millio ns. 
Market-intermediary-product fixed effects and month dummies are included in the model, but not reported to save space. 
 
Discussion 
In this paper, we use three related studies to identify how a manufacturer can manage 
intermediaries to increase its profit and intermediar ies’ satisfaction. In Study 1, we identify through 
template analysis and text analytics tools that so me sort of alignment of  product, market, and 
intermediary may be beneficial to manufacturers. Insi ghts suggest that such alignment can also increase 
intermediaries’ satisfaction. In  terms of theory, we build on the GVA model to demonstrate why 
alignment of product, intermediary, and market can be a profitable strategy for manufacturers. In Study 2, we test the insights obtained from Study 1 to show that alignment at product, market, and 
intermediary levels differentially impacts the st udied manufacturer’s revenue performance after 

 
36 
 controlling for product-, market-, and intermediary- related factors, the manufacturer’s marketing mix 
decisions, macro-economic factors, and seasonality. In Study 3, we quantify the managerial implications of the insights obtained in Study 2 in the field. Specifically, we show that insights from 
empirical research can substantially help manufacture rs deploy strategies and increase profits. Hence, 
we make critical contributions to  the literature and practice.  
Contributions to the literature 
Perhaps one of the significant contributions of our study is that it suggests increased attention 
should be paid in the future to managing intermediaries through strategies other than those outlined in the distribution channel literature. For example, existing channel research has identified coercion, 
incentives monitoring, relational governance, and idiosyncratic investments as the major channel 
governance strategies. However, our research shows that, beyond these strategies, a manufacturer may 
look at the alignment of product types with the market and intermediary types and act as a conduit of 
knowledge to provide strategic advice to interme diaries and advance the power and effectiveness of 
relational governance. Study 1 finds that an effecti ve intermediary management strategy could advise 
the intermediaries about what product types to deal with and in which market. In essence, insights 
from Study 1 contribute to the literature on rela tional governance and bring forward an additional 
relational governance strategy that may be fruitful for manufacturers and intermediaries.  
Second, although we use the GVA model to argue for the differential effects of the alignment 
of product, market, and interme diary types on manufacturers’ performance, this model is not 
developed for a multilayered context (market, produ ct, and intermediaries). We show that even when 
multiple layers exist, the effect of relational govern ance strategies (i.e., the alignment of intermediaries, 
products, and markets) can be explained with th e help of the GVA framework. Thus, we extend the 
GVA framework’s scope and open the door fo r future research in this space.   

 
37 
 Third, the present study outlines the tremendous need for building contingency theories of 
distribution channel relationships. If we ignore the diversity of channels, we will not be able to 
understand further how channel governance opera te in different contexts. Extant literature has 
recognized that the context in which firms operate has a tremendous impact on the way it develops strategies ( Frazier, Gill and Kale 1989 ). Our results positively reinforce this conclusion. Therefore, the 
market context faced by intermediaries, including the type of market in which they are embedded, 
needs to be considered to develop contin gency theories for intermediary research.  
Fourth, with Study 2, we overcome the criticism of not exploring the practical implications of 
intermediary management strategies presented in the channel literature. Specifically, we show that the 
understanding of managers and intermediaries of th e need to align intermediary, market, and product 
types is critical for a manufacturer. In essence, we  find that various combinations of intermediary, 
market and product types have differential impact s on the manufacturer’s revenue, extending the 
findings of Kumar et al. (2015). We also add to this line of inquiry by adding vertical heterogeneity by 
adding market type (i.e., rural, urban, or semi-u rban). Based on the estimation results, we conduct a 
supply-side analysis and show the effect of a strategic distri bution resource reallocation on the 
manufacturer’s revenue. Finally, we show an additional way in which a manufacturer can add value to 
intermediaries. The extant literature explores the drivers of dealer satisf action. We show that 
manufacturers’ resource allocation decisions can enha nce dealer satisfaction. This finding provides 
critical insights for managing channel conflict.  
Contributions to practice 
Two of the important questions raised in channe l intermediary research are: 1) how a manager 
can use empirical findings in practice to enhance her company’s profit; and 2) whether the empirical 
insights are useful in increasing profitability. We belie ve that the applied nature of research in channel 
management is the need of the hour, and in this study, we attempt to show that insights from an 

 
38 
 empirical study can be taken to the field to tes t their effectiveness. As such, through a field 
implementation, we show that the a pplication of alignment strategies can increase the manufacturer’s 
revenue. In our context, the manufacturer has gained  a 13% increase in profit in the region where the 
implementation is carried out. Note that the effects of the implementation can be more significant if 
it is made throughout the market. It is critical  to think about the welfare implications of the 
recommended strategies on intermediaries, as well as the boost to manufacturers’ performance. This 
research provides an additional strategy for ma nufacturers to enhance intermediary satisfaction. 
Consistently, through Study 3, we show that a manufacturer can increase such satisfaction by 7.71% by providing strategic advice on the alignment of the intermediary with product and market types.  
We wish to highlight that this study investigates  two critical matrices in the distribution channel 
literature - manufacturers’ revenue and intermediarie s’ satisfaction - using advanced analytics tools 
such as revenue optimization and a predictive re venue model that accounts for endogeneity and 
heterogeneity. Moreover, this study provides an appr oach for implementing analytics-driven results in 
practice and captures the effect of implementation. 
Strategically, using the insights from the study,  manufacturers may decide on pricing strategies 
such as discounts to make the alignment work in a particular market condition for a specific product 
type; develop intermediary appreciation strategies to keep intermediaries motivated (by closely looking 
at the combinations); generate value for intermediar ies so that they remain motivated (by, again, 
emphasizing a specific alignment), and develop eff ective intermediary pass-through strategies. Finally, 
regarding the generalizability of the insights, we would like to highlight that they should be valid across 
most manufacturers in emerging markets; however, market regulations, structure, and norms may sometimes prevent generalization. 
Limitations and Future Research Directions 

 
39 
 We first caution readers to be aware of the poten tial constraints inherent in our data and field 
implementations. Although we emphasize the value of  exploring, investigating, and implementing 
strategies that can help manufacturers manage intermediaries for their own and the latter’s welfare, we have met certain limitations. First, we emphasize that  the results of our study may only be generalized 
to other industry contexts in any emerging market  with the utmost caution. Our empirical study and 
field implementation is performed in only one industry and one emerging economy. Given the 
similarities in market and channel structures acro ss emerging markets, we expect qualitatively similar 
findings to emerge from research studies performe d in other emerging markets. We urge that more 
empirical research be conducted in different indust ries in other emerging economies to verify this 
expectation. Second, we consider th e number of intermediaries in each intermediary type (i.e., dealers 
and institutional buyers).  
One of the limitations that may influence the results is that the size of the intermediaries and 
their covered markets are omitted due to the unavai lability of the required data. Future research may 
investigate this issue in detail when the relevant da ta become available. Third, it is possible that a 
manufacturer experiences competition at the intermedia ry level. However, data availability restricts us 
from incorporating such competition in our model. Future research may bring a much-required understanding of such competition and how it ca n impact manufacturers’ profit. Fourth, our 
exposition of the strategies to increase intermediary satisfaction is solely based on the insights gained 
from the field implementation. Although we could have data on intermediary satisfaction from Study 
3, it would be interesting to see how the effect of such satisfacti on changes manufacturer profitability 
when a larger sample is surveyed, and secondary data  are used. Fifth, our empirical findings can not 
be directly theorized (using hypotheses), although  we attempted to explain why alignment may be a 
fruitful strategy building on the GVA framework. Give n the topic is new and that not much research 
has been done in this area, this study focuses on the exploratory analysis to uncover relationships 

 
40 
 across alignment at product, market and intermediary-type level, manufacturer performance, and 
intermediary satisfaction.  As such, we do not pr opose hypotheses and develop conceptual arguments 
in support of our empirical results. Future research opportunities will be to develop theoretical propositions using the GVA or similar frameworks and empirically test the theoretically derived 
insights in similar contexts. One can also build on our empirical insights to develop new theoretical 
insights. Finally, one potential future research avenue  is to investigate the valuation of intermediaries 
and how manufacturers’ management of such assessmen t can enhance profitability. In this context, 
one can identify why and how investigating the valuat ion of intermediaries is different from other B2B 
set-ups, bring the possible network effects into context, use appropriate modeling framework, and show implementable strategies.  References 
Abbas, Ahmed, Yilu Zhou, Shasha Deng, and Pengzhu Zhang (2018). "Text Analytics to Support Sense-Making 
in Social Media: A Language-Action Perspective." MIS Quarterly 42 (2). 
Anderson, Erin and Barton Weitz (1992). "The Use of Pledges to Build and Sustain Commitment in 
Distribution Channels." Journal of Marketing Research 29 (1), 18-34. 
Anderson, James C and James A Naru s (1984). "A Model of the Distribu tor's Perspective of Distributor-
Manufacturer Working Relationships." Journal of Marketing 48 (4), 62-74. 
Anderson, James C Narus and Ja mes A Narayandas (2009). "Bus iness Market Management." Understanding, 
Creating, and Delivering Value. 3rd ed. New Jersey . 
Anisimova, Tatiana and Felix Mavondo (2014). "Alignin g Company and Dealer Pers pectives in Corporate 
Branding: Implications for Dealer Satisfaction and Commitment." Journal of Business-to-Business Marketing 
21 (1), 35-56. 
Arnold, Todd J and Robert W Palmatier ( 2012). "14 Channel Rel ationship St rategy." Handbook of Marketing 
Strategy , 231. 
Arsel, Zeynep (2017). "Asking Questions with Reflexiv e Focus: A Tutorial on Designing and Conducting 
Interviews." Journal of Consumer Research 44 (4), 939-48. 
Bailey, Joseph P and Yannis Bakos (1997). "An Explor atory Study of the Emergi ng Role of Electronic 
Intermediaries." International Journal of Electronic Commerce 1 (3), 7-20. 
Besharov, Marya L and Wendy K Smith (2014). "Multiple Institutional Logics  in Organization s: Explaining 
Their Varied Nature and Implications." Academy of Management Review 39 (3), 364-81. 
Birt, Linda, Suzanne Scott, Debbie Cavers, Christin e Campbell, and Fiona Walter  (2016). "Member Checking: 
A Tool to Enhance Trustworthiness or Merely a Nod to Validation?" Qualitative Health Research 26 (13), 
1802-11. 
Bombaij, Nick JF and Marnik G De kimpe (2019). "When Do Loyalty Pr ograms Work? The Moderating Role 
of Design, Retailer-Strategy, and Country Characteristics." International Journal of Research in Marketing . 
Borah, Sourav Bikash, Srinivas Prakhya, and Amalesh Sharma (2019). "Leveraging Service Recovery Strategies 
to Reduce Customer Churn in an Emerging Market." Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 1-21. 
Braun, Virginia and Victoria Clarke (2013). Successful Qualitative Research: A Practical Guide for Beginners . sage. 
Breckenridge, Jenna and Derek Jones (2009). "Demysti fying Theoretical Samplin g in Grounded Theory 
Research." Grounded Theory Review 8 (2). 

 
41 
 Brown, James R, Robert F Lusch, and Darrel D Mueh ling (1983). "Conflict and Power-Dependence Relations 
in Retailer-Supplier Channels." Journal of Retailing 59 (4), 53-80. 
Brown, James R, Robert F Lusch, and Carolyn Y Ni cholson (1995). "Power and Relationship Commitment: 
Their Impact on Marketing Channel Member Performance." Journal of Retailing 71 (4), 363-92. 
Chatterji, Aaron K, Colleen M Cunning ham, and John E Joseph (2019). "The Limits of Relational Governance: 
Sales Force Strategies in the Us Medical Device Industry." Strategic Management Journal 40 (1), 55-78. 
Chung, Chiayin, Sharmila C Chatterjee, and Sanjit Sengupta (2012). "Manufacturers’ Reliance on Channel 
Intermediaries: Value Drivers in the Presence of a Direct Web Channel." Industrial Marketing Management 
41 (1), 40-53. 
Corley, Kevin G and Dennis A Gioia (2011). "Building Theory About Theory Build ing: What Constitutes a 
Theoretical Contribution?" Academy of Management Review 36 (1), 12-32. 
Cosguner, Koray, Tat Y Chan, and PB Seetharaman (2018). "Dynamic Pricing in a Distribution Channel in the 
Presence of Switching Costs." Management Science 64 (3), 1212-29. 
Coughlan, Anne T (1985).  "Competition and Cooper ation in Marketing Cha nnel Choice: Theory and 
Application." Marketing Science 4 (2), 110-29. 
Coughlan, Anne T, Erin Anderson, Louis W Stern, and Adel El-Ansary (2006). "Marketing Channels." 
Dahlquist, Steven H and David A Griffith (2014). "M ultidyadic Industrial Channels: Understanding 
Component Supplier Profits and Original Equipment Manufacturer Behavior." Journal of Marketing 78 
(4), 59-79. 
EGEDE, EHIKWE ANDREW (2013). "Cha nnel Structure and Strategy D ecisions in Emerging Markets." 
New Media and Mass Communication 20, 42-49. 
Elfenbein, Daniel W and Todd R Zenger (2014). "What Is  a Relationship Worth? Re peated Exchange and the 
Development and Deployment of Relational Capital." Organization Science 25 (1), 222-44. 
Emerson, Richard M (1962). "Pow er-Dependence Relations." American Sociological Review , 31-41. 
Fites, Donald V (1996). "Make Yo ur Dealers Your Partners." Harvard Business Review 74 (2), 84-&. 
Frazier, Gary L (1983). "On the Measurement of In terfirm Power in Channels of Distribution." Journal of 
Marketing Research 20 (2), 158-66. 
Frazier, Gary L, James D Gill, and Sudhir H Kale (1989) . "Dealer Dependence Levels  and Reciprocal Actions 
in a Channel of Distribution in a Developing Country." Journal of Marketing 53 (1), 50-69. 
Ganesan, Shankar (1994). "Determinants of Long-T erm Orientation in Buyer -Seller Relationships." Journal of 
marketing 58 (2), 1-19. 
Gaski, John F and John R Nevin (1985 ). "The Differential Effects of Ex ercised and Unexercised Power Sources 
in a Marketing Channel." Journal of Marketing Research 22 (2), 130-42. 
Gassenheimer, Jule B and Rosemary Ramsey (1994). "The  Impact of Dependence on  Dealer Satisfaction: A 
Comparison of Reseller-Su pplier Relationships." Journal of Retailing 70 (3), 253-66. 
Geyskens, Inge, Jan-Benedict  EM Steenkamp, and Nirmalya Kumar ( 1999). "A Meta-Analysis of Satisfaction 
in Marketing Channel Relationships." Journal of Marketing Research 36 (2), 223-38. 
--- (1999). "A Meta-Analysis of Satisfaction  in Marketing Channel Relationships." Journal of Marketing Research , 
223-38. 
Ghosh, Mrinal and George John (1999). "Gover nance Value Analysis an d Marketing Strategy." Journal of 
Marketing 63 (4_suppl1), 131-45. 
--- (2005). "Strategic Fit in Industrial Alliances: An  Empirical Test of Governance Value Analysis." Journal of 
Marketing Research 42 (3), 346-57. 
Gilliland, David I, Daniel C Bello, and Gregory T Gund lach (2010). "Control-Based  Channel Governance and 
Relative Dependence." Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 38 (4), 441-55. 
Gilliland, David I and Stephen K Kim (2014). "When Do Incentives Work in Channels of Distribution?" Journal 
of the Academy of Marketing Science 42 (4), 361-79. 
Gioia, Dennis A, Kevin G Corley, and Aimee L Ham ilton (2013). "Seeking Qualit ative Rigor in Inductive 
Research: Notes on the Gioia Methodology." Organizational Research Methods 16 (1), 15-31. 
Gulati, Ranjay (1995). "Social Structure and Allian ce Formation Patterns: A Longitudinal Analysis." 
Administrative Science Quarterly , 619-52. 

 
42 
 Heide, Jan B (1994). "Interor ganizational Governance in Marketing Channels." Journal of Marketing 58 (1), 71-
85. 
Holloway, Betsy B and Sharon E Beatty (2003). "Service Fa ilure in Online Retailing: A Recovery Opportunity." 
Journal of Service Research 6 (1), 92-105. 
Holloway, Samuel S and Anne Parm igiani (2016). "Friends and Prof its Don’t Mix: The Performance 
Implications of Repeated Partnerships." Academy of Management Journal 59 (2), 460-78. 
Ittoo, Ashwin and Antal van den Bosch (2016). "Text Analytics in Industry: Challenges, Desiderata and 
Trends." Computers in Industry 78, 96-107. 
Jap, Sandy D (2001). "Perspectives on Joint Competitive Advantages in  Buyer–Supplier Relationships." 
International Journal of Research in Marketing 18 (1-2), 19-35. 
--- (1999). "Pie-Expansion Efforts: Collaboration Processes in Buyer–Supplier Relationships." Journal of 
marketing Research 36 (4), 461-75. 
Jap, Sandy D and Shankar Ganesan (2000). "Control Mechanisms and the Relationship Life Cycle: Implications 
for Safeguarding Specific Investments and Developing Commitment." Journal of Marketing Research 37 
(2), 227-45. 
Jeuland, Abel P and Steven M Shugan (1988). "Note—Channel of Distribution Profits When Channel Members 
Form Conjectures." Marketing Science 7 (2), 202-10. 
Kalaignanam, Kartik, Venkatesh Shankar, and Ra jan Varadarajan (2007). "A symmetric New Product 
Development Alliances: Win-Win or Win-Lose Partnerships?" Management Science 53 (3), 357-74. 
Kamakura, Wagner, Praveen K Kopa lle, and Donald R Lehmann (2014) . "Empirical Ge neralizations in 
Retailing." Journal of Retailing 90 (2), 121. 
Kashyap, Vishal, Kersi D Antia, and Gary L Frazier ( 2012). "Contracts, Ex tracontractual In centives, and Ex 
Post Behavior in Franchise Channel Relationships." Journal of Marketing Research 49 (2), 260-76. 
King, Nigel (2012). "Doing Template Analysis." Qualitative organizational research: Core methods and current challenges 
426. 
Krafft, Manfred, Oliver Goetz, Mu rali Mantrala, Francesca Sotgiu, an d Sebastian Tillmanns (2015). "The 
Evolution of Marketing Channel Research Domains and Methodologies: An Integrative Review and 
Future Directions." Journal of Retailing 91 (4), 569-85. 
Kumar, Nirmalya, Lisa K Scheer, and Jan-Benedict EM Steenkamp (1995). "The Effects of Perceived 
Interdependence on Dealer Attitudes." Journal of Marketing Research 32 (3), 348-56. 
Kumar, Nirmalya, Louis W Stern, and James C Anderson (1993). "Conduct ing Interorganizational Research 
Using Key Informants." Academy of Management Journal 36 (6), 1633-51. 
Kumar, V., Sarang Sunder, and Amalesh Sharma (2015). "Leveraging Distribution to Maximize Firm 
Performance in Emerging Markets." Journal of Retailing 91 (4), 627-43. 
Lassar, Walfried M and Jeffrey L Kerr (1996). "Strategy and Control in Supplier–Distributor Relationships: An 
Agency Perspective." Strategic Management Journal 17 (8), 613-32. 
Lewis, M Christine and Douglas M La mbert (1991). "A Model of Channel Member Performance, Dependence, 
and Satisfaction." Journal of Retailing 67 (2), 205. 
Lilien, Gary L (1979). "Exceptional Paper—Advisor 2: Modeling the Marketing Mix Decision for Industrial 
Products." Management Science 25 (2), 191-204. 
Marshall, Catherine and Gr etchen B Rossman (2014). Designing Qualitative Research . Sage publications. 
Miles, Matthew B, A Michael Huberman, and Johnny Saldaña (2014). "Qualitative Data Analysis: A Methods 
Sourcebook. 3rd." in: Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Müller, Oliver, Iris Junglas, Stefan Debortoli, and Jan vom Brocke (2016). "Using Te xt Analytics to Derive 
Customer Service Management Benefits from Unstructured Data." MIS Quarterly Executive 15 (4), 243-
58. 
Narus, Jim and Bob Donath (2009). Build, Fix, or Terminate: The Distributor's Guide to More Profitable Supplier 
Relations . Natl Assn Wholesale-Distr. 
Nickerson, Jack A, Barton H Hamilton, and Tetsuo Wada (2001). "Market Positi on, Resource Profile, and 
Governance: Linking Porter  and Williamson in the Context of Inte rnational Courier and Small Package 
Services in Japan." Strategic Management Journal 22 (3), 251-73. 

 
43 
 Palmatier, Robert W, Rajiv P Dant , Dhruv Grewal, and Kenneth R Evan s (2006). "Factors Influencing the 
Effectiveness of Relationship Marketing: A Meta-Analysis." Journal of Marketing 70 (4), 136-53. 
Papies, Dominik, Peter Ebbes, and Harald J Van He erde (2017). "Addressing En dogeneity in  Marketing 
Models." Pp 581-627 in Advanced Methods for Modeling Markets : Springer. 
Petrin, Amil and Kenneth Train (2010). "A Control Fu nction Approach to Endoge neity in Consumer Choice 
Models." Journal of Marketing Research 47 (1), 3-13. 
Sharma, Amalesh, V Kumar, and Koray Cosguner (20 19). "Modeling Emerging-Market Firms’ Competitive 
Retail Distribution Strategies." Journal of Marketing Research 56 (3), 439-58. 
Sharma, Amalesh, Mauli Soni, Sourav Bikash Borah, and Alok R Saboo (2020). "Identifying the Drivers of 
Luxury Brand Sales in Emerging Ma rkets: An Exploratory Study." Journal of Business Research 111, 25-
40. 
Skinner, Steven J, Jule B Gassenheimer, and Scott W Kell ey (1992). "Cooperation in Su pplier-Dealer Relations." 
Journal of Retailing 68 (2), 174-93. 
Stem, Louis W and I Adel (1988). "El- Ansary, Marketing Channe ls." in: Prentice-hall international editions, 
New Jersey. 
Venkatesan, Rajkumar, Paul Farris, Leandro A Guiss oni, and Marcos Fava Neve s (2015). "Consumer Brand 
Marketing through Full-and Self-Service Channels in an Emerging Economy." Journal of Retailing 91 (4), 
644-59. 
Venkatraman, Nenkat and John E Prescott (1990). "Environment ‐Strategy Coalignment: An Empirical Test of 
Its Performance Implications." Strategic Management Journal 11 (1), 1-23. 
Watson IV, George F, Stefan Worm, Robert W Palmati er, and Shankar Ganesan ( 2015). "The Evolution of 
Marketing Channels: Trends and Research Directions." Journal of Retailing 91 (4), 546-68. 
Williamson, Oliver E (1996). "Efficiency, Power, Aut hority and Economic Organization." Pp 11-42 in 
Transaction Cost Economics and Beyond : Springer. 
Zhao, Hui, Vinayak Deshpande, and Jennifer K Ryan  (2005). "Inventory Sharing and Rationing in 
Decentralized Dealer Networks." Management Science 51 (4), 531-47. 
Zikmund, William G, Michael D'Amico, and George E Prough (1984). Test Bank to Accompany Marketing . J. 
Wiley. 
Zineldin, Mosad and Patrik Jonsson (2000). "An Examination of the Ma in Factors Affecting 
Trust/Commitment in Supplier ‐Dealer Relationships: An Empirical Study of the Swedish Wood 
Industry." TQM magazine . 
  

 
44 
 Web-Appendix 
WA Figure 1:  Text Analysis of the response to “ What do you think can be done to manage channel 
intermediaries?”  
Panel A:  Link Analysis                                                                         Panel B:  Dendrogram 
        
 
 
Panel C:  Proximity Plot 
 
WA Table A1:  Frequency Count 
 
FREQUENCY % SHOWN % PROCESSED % TO TAL NO. CASES % CASES TF • IDF 
ALIGNMENT 19 24.05% 14.73% 8.37% 19 63.33% 3.8 
MARKET 19 24.05% 14.73% 8.37% 19 63.33% 3.8 
PRODUCTS 18 22.78% 13.95% 7.93% 18 60.00% 4 
LEVEL 13 16.46% 10.08% 5.73% 13 43.33% 4.7 
DEALERS 10 12.66% 7.75% 4.41% 10 33.33% 4.8 
 
WA Figure 2:  Text Analysis of the response to “ Are channel intermediaries important for your 
business? Are there any specific intermediary mana gement strategies you have (e.g., pay, trip, 
incentive, discount, etc.)?” 
Panel A:  Link Analysis                                                              Panel B:  Dendrogram 


 
45 
  
 
 
WA Figure 3:  Text Analysis of the response to “ how do manufacturers help intermediaries increase 
sales?”   
Panel A:  Link Analysis                                                                               Panel B:  Dendrogram 
 
WA Table A2:  Frequency Table 
 
FREQUENCY % SHOWN % PROCESSED % TO TAL NO. CASES % CASES TF • IDF 
BENEFITS 27 20.00% 17.65% 10.80% 27 93.10% 0.8 
BUSINESS 14 10.37% 9.15% 5.60% 14 48.28% 4.4 
MANUFACTURERS 14 10.37% 9.15% 5.60% 14 48.28% 4.4 
MULTIPLE 14 10.37% 9.15% 5.60% 14 48.28% 4.4 
PROVIDE 14 10.37% 9.15% 5.60% 14 48.28% 4.4 
INCENTIVES 13 9.63% 8.50% 5.20% 13 44.83% 4.5 
LUXURY 13 9.63% 8.50% 5.20% 13 44.83% 4.5 
PRODUCTS 13 9.63% 8.50% 5.20% 13 44.83% 4.5 
TRIPS 13 9.63% 8.50% 5.20% 13 44.83% 4.5 
 


 
46 
 WA Figure 4:  Text Analysis of the response to “ what do you see as a major strategy that can help you 
increase performance?”   
Panel A: Link Analysis                                                      Panel B: Dendrogram  
 
Panel C: Proximity Plot 
 
WA Table A3:  Frequency Count 
 
FREQUENCY % SHOWN % PROCESSED % TO TAL NO. CASES % CASES TF • IDF 
ADVISING 21 16.67% 11.80% 7.61% 21 72.41% 2.9 
ALLIGNMENT 32 25.40% 17.98% 11.59% 21 72.41% 4.5 
HELPS 10 7.94% 5.62% 3.62% 10 34.48% 4.6 
MANUFACTURERS 11 8.73% 6.18% 3.99% 11 37.93% 4.6 
MARKET 15 11.90% 8.43% 5.43% 15 51.72% 4.3 
MISS 11 8.73% 6.18% 3.99% 11 37.93% 4.6 
PRODUCT 15 11.90% 8.43% 5.43% 15 51.72% 4.3 
REQUIRED 11 8.73% 6.18% 3.99% 11 37.93% 4.6 
 
 


