See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/355342611
Dynamic Pricing for New Products Using a Utility-Based Generalization of the
Bass Diffusion Model
Preprint    in  Manag ement Scienc e · Mar ch 2022
DOI: 10.1287/mnsc.2021.4257
CITATIONS
0READS
560
2 author s:
Koray Cosguner
Indiana Univ ersity Bloomingt on
11 PUBLICA TIONS    102 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Seethu See thar aman
Washingt on Univ ersity in St . Louis
21 PUBLICA TIONS    102 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Koray Cosguner  on 16 Oct ober 2021.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.

1 
  
 
Dynamic Pricing for New Products Using a 
Utility-Based Generalization of the Bass Diffusion Model 
   
 
Koray Cosguner  
Assistant Professor of Marketing, Indiana University 
  
P.B. (Seethu) Seetharaman 
† 
W. Patrick McGinnis Professor of Marketi ng, Washington University in St. Louis 
  
October 14, 2021 
  
Forthcoming at Management Science 
 
  
 
† Corresponding Author: Seethu Seetharaman, email: seethu@wustl.edu ; Ph: 314-935-3574. Both authors contributed equally to 
this paper. The authors thank the seminar participations from Em ory University, Georgia Institute of Technology, University of 
Georgia, Georgia State University at the 2017 Georgia Research Symposium, at the 2017 Marketing Science Conference, and at 
the 2018 Frontiers of Empirical Marketing Conference. The author s also thank Professor (Emeritus) Ambar Rao for his comments. 

2 
 Dynamic Pricing for New Products Using a  
Utility-Based Generalization of the Bass Diffusion Model 
 
Abstract 
 The Bass Model (BM) has an excellent  track record in the realm of new product sales forecasting. However, 
its use for optimal dynamic pricing or advertising is  relatively limited since the Generalized Bass Model 
(GBM), which extends the BM to handle marketing vari ables, uses only percentage changes in marketing 
variables rather than their actual values. This restri cts the GBM’s prescriptive use, for example, to derive 
the optimal price path for a new product, conditional on an assumed launch price, but not the launch price 
itself. In this paper, we employ a utility-based extens ion of the BM, which can yield normative prescriptions 
regarding both the introductory price, as well as the pr ice path after launch, for the new product. We offer 
two versions of this utility-b ased diffusion model, namely the Bass-Gumbel Diffusion Model (BGDM)  and 
the Bass-Logit Diffusion Model (BLDM) , the latter of which has been previously used by Krishnan, 
Seetharaman and Vakratsas (2012). We show that both BGDM and BLDM  handily outperform the GBM in 
forecasting new product sales using empirical data from four product categories. We discuss how to 
estimate BGDM  and BLDM  in the absence of past sales data. We co mpare the optimal pricing policy of the 
BLDM  with the GBM  and derive optimal pricing pol icies that are implied by the BLDM  under various 
ranges of model parameters. We illustrate a dynamic pr icing approach that allows managers to derive 
optimal marketing policies in a computationally c onvenient manner; and extend this approach to a 
competitive, multi-product case. 
 
Keywords : Dynamic Pricing, Optimal Pricing, Prescrip tive Analytics, New Products, Diffusion Model, 
Bass Model (BM), Generalized Bass Model (GBM), New Product Sales Forecasting. 
  

3 
 Introduction 
The Bass Model (BM, henceforth), first proposed  by Bass (1969), is the best-known new product 
diffusion model in the marketing literature. The BM h as well served the managerial purpose of new product 
sales forecasting in thousands of industrial applicati ons over the past 50 years (successful applications 
include forecasting market adoptions of DirecT V, XM-Sirius Satellite Radio, Microsoft Windows 
Operating Systems, etc.). The appealing aspect of the BM is its parsimony. Using just two parameters -- 
the innovation coefficient (p) and the imitation coeffi cient (q) -- the BM fits a wide range of observed 
adoption patterns, which reflect two influences on ma rket adoption of the new product: the effects of 
external media and interpersonal communications (or “w ord of mouth”). While pre-launch sales forecasting 
has indeed been its main field of use, another impor tant managerial purpose for the BM is to inform the 
development of optimal marketing policies for the new pr oduct, e.g., dynamic pricing, advertising, etc. (see 
Peres, Muller and Mahajan 2010 for an  extensive review of the BM). 
With regard to the above-mentioned managerial purpose of designing optimal marketing policies 
for new products, it is necessary for the BM to incorporate the effects of marketing variables on new product 
diffusion. Taking this view, the Generalized Bass Model (GBM, henceforth), which is an extension of the 
BM to handle marketing variables such as price, advert ising, etc., was proposed by Bass, Krishnan and Jain 
(1994). The GBM nests the BM as a special case. 1 In fact, the GBM reduces to the BM when either the 
new product’s marketing mix is cons tant over time or when each marketing mix variable changes by a 
constant percentage amount from one period to the next. For example, suppose price is the only marketing 
variable of interest, if price always decreases by x % from one period to the next, then the BM and the GBM 
would do equally well in terms of fitting the observe d sales pattern of the new product even though the BM 
ignores the effects of price. The reason for this is th at the GBM overlays the effects of the marketing mix 
within the BM by parameterizing the diffusion speed in a given period to depend on only the percentage 
 
1 Several other models of new product adop tion have been proposed in the literature to  handle the effects of marketing variables . 
However, unlike the GBM, they typically do not reduce to the BM as a special case. 

4 
 changes in the marketing mix variables from the previ ous period to the current period, and not the actual 
current values of the marketing mix variables. Therefore,  if the percentage change in price is constant from 
one period to the next, the price change covariate is  perfectly collinear with tim e, making it unnecessary to 
explicitly incorporate the effect of the price change  in the model from the standpoint of forecasting sales. 
The above-mentioned operationalizati on of marketing mix effects, using percentage changes under 
the GBM, makes it necessary to make  additional assumptions before rende ring the GBM usable for optimal 
price policy planning. For example, Krishnan, Bass a nd Jain (1999) make a specific parametric assumption 
about how the diffusion speed of the new product add itionally depends on the absolute price of the new 
product. This parametric assumption is not, nor can be, validated using empirical data. The assumption is 
only made for the sake of mathematical necessity to solve the dynamic optimiza tion problem characterizing 
the new product’s optimal pricing policy. Krishnan and Jai n (2006) make a similar untested assumption 
about how the diffusion speed depends on the absolute a dvertising level to derive  the optimal advertising 
policy for a new product. Even after making such unt ested assumptions, the GBM can  be used to derive 
only the optimal price path or advertising path for the new product after launch,  conditional on an assumed 
launch price or advertising levels, but not the optimal  launch price or advertisi ng level themselves (which 
must be figured out using other means, such as a cons umer survey, as discussed in Krishnan, Bass and Jain 
1999). Furthermore, Fruchter and Van den Bulte (2011 ) explicitly show that different assumptions about 
how absolute levels of the marketing mix are incorporat ed in the GBM can lead to vastly different optimal 
marketing policies. On that basis, Fruchter and Van den Bulte (2011) argue that the GBM is ill-suited for 
normative marketing planning. In sum, therefore, the GBM, while being an excellent predictive model for 
sales forecasting, has a serious shortcoming as a prescr iptive model for marketing policy planning. This 
shortcoming has been previously recognized in the literature (see, for example, Bass, Jain and Krishnan 
2000). 
In this paper, we employ an a lternative extension of the BM, which is utility-based (unlike the 
GBM) and does not suffer from the prescriptive w eakness of the GBM. Built on the foundations of 
consumer utility maximization, this utility-based diff usion model allows the a doption rate for the new 

5 
 product to depend on the absolute levels  of the marketing mix structurally. 2 Therefore, the diffusion model 
we use can yield, for example, norm ative prescriptions regardin g both the introductory  price and the optimal 
price path after launch for the new product. In additi on to the marketing mix, the diffusion model can also 
incorporate market characteristics, category characteristics, and macro-econom ic variables, if available, to 
affect the consumer’s utility function. We offer two versions of the diffusion model, namely the Bass-
Gumbel Diffusion Model (BGDM)  and the Bass-Logit Diffusion Model (BLDM) . The BGDM version is new 
to the literature and nests the BM as a special case and reduces to the BM when consumers are unresponsive 
to the marketing mix. On the other hand, the BLDM  version – which has been previously estimated on SUV 
adoption data by Krishnan, Seetharaman and Vakrat sas (2012) – does not nest the BM as a special case. 
However, the hazard of the BLDM  mimics the parametric shape of the BM hazard very closely; therefore, 
in a practical sense, it almost  nests the BM as a special case. Since product managers are often interested 
in figuring out the launch price and advertising st rategy for their new products, and the GBM cannot be 
used to derive launch strategies for the marke ting mix (as explained above); hence, both the BGDM  and 
BLDM  offer a practical benefit in that regard. 
Using empirical data from 4 product categories (tha t have been previously used by Bass, Krishnan 
and Jain 1994 and Jiang, Bass and Bass 2006), we show that both BGDM and BLDM  handily outperform 
the GBM and BM in forecasting new product sales both in sample and out of sample, with the BLDM  
outperforming the BGDM . On the basis of these findings, we propose that even if one’s purpose is to only 
forecast new product sales, and not optimize the new product’s marketing mix,  both BGDM and BLDM 
are still to be preferred to the GBM. In addition,  both BGDM and BLDM predict the peak time of adoptions 
more accurately than the GBM. 
We illustrate the prescriptive consequences of th e utility-based diffusion model for new product 
pricing, in terms of deriving both the optimal launch price and the optim al price path for the new product 
after product launch. Using a computationally conven ient dynamic pricing approach, we compare the 
 
2 Utility-based models of new product adoption have been previous ly proposed in the literature. However, Bass, Krishnan and Jain  
(1994) show that the GBM consistently outperform s these models in predicting sales outcomes. 

6 
 dynamic price path yielded by the BLDM  versus that of the GBM . Finally, we extend this pricing approach 
to handle the competitive, multi-product context. Ou r prescriptive analytics solution will be useful to 
practitioners for new product planning decisions, especi ally given the ubiquitous global use of the BM for 
new product sales forecasting and characterizing inte rnal versus external influences on new product 
adoption. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we present a brief literature review. In 
section 3, we first derive the widely used BM as a ut ility-based diffusion model. Next, we illustrate how to 
incorporate the marketing mix variables into this  utility-based diffusion model. Then, we lay out two 
different versions of the di ffusion model, namely the Bass-Gumbel Diffusion Model (BGDM)  and the Bass-
Logit Diffusion Model (BLDM) , the latter of which has been pr eviously estimated by Krishnan, 
Seetharaman and Vakratsas (2012). In section 4, we present the empirical results from estimating BGDM , 
BLDM , and two comparison models (BM, GBM), using ne w product sales data for four different product 
categories. In section 5, we discuss how to derive th e optimal pricing policy for the new product, given the 
parameters of the utility-based diffusion model. We present a computationally convenient solution to the 
firm’s dynamic optimization problem, which is easy for ma nagers to use. In addition, we present the optimal 
pricing policies for a new product that are implied by the BLDM  under various ranges of the model 
parameters. Then, we illustrate how to extend the dynamic pricing approach to a competitive, multi-product 
context. Section 6 concludes with directions for future research. 
 
Literature Review 
A number of researchers in the 1980s studied optimal dynamic pricing for new products using 
analytical models of dynamic pricing (Bass and Bultez 1982, Kalish 1983, Kalish and Lilien 1983, 
Thompson and Teng 19 84, Dockner and Jorgensen 1988). These m odels relied on assumptions regarding 
consumer adoption patterns for ne w products. Subsequent research in the 1990s focused on explicit 
extensions of the BM, by then a workhorse empirica l model for new product sales forecasting, to estimate 

7 
 the effects of price on new product adoption (Jain and Rao 1990, Bayus 1992,  Bass, Krishnan and Jain 
1994). The extension that became most well accepted in the marketing literature is the GBM of Bass, 
Krishnan and Jain (1994), which has subsequently not only been used in several industry consulting 
applications but also built in to commercially distributed diffusion soft ware such as DecisionPro’s MEXL, 
Number Analytics etc. Given the wide acceptance of the GBM in both research and practice, Krishnan, 
Bass and Jain (1999) analytically derived the optimal dynamic pricing implications of the GBM. In doing 
this, Krishnan, Bass and Jain (1999) treated the in troductory price of the new product as an exogenously 
pre-specified constraint to render the optimization pr oblem solvable. In this research, we employ a utility-
based extension of the BM, which does not warrant such  a constraint for price optimization. We offer two 
versions of this utility-based diffu sion model. Under both versions, th e introductory price for the new 
product can be explicitly optimized rather than assumed. 
Song and Chintagunta (2003) and Melnikov (20 12) propose and estimate utility-based models of 
consumer adoption of durable goods. Unlike the utility-based  model that we use, their models are not based 
on the BM. However, the implied aggregate adoption pa tterns yielded by their models could resemble the 
S-shaped adoption curve of the BM under some cond itions. The aggregate adoption curve is derived as an 
endogenous consequence of the choi ces of individual consumers who are both heterogeneous in terms of 
their price sensitivity and forward-looking in terms of hol ding future price expecta tions for the product. In 
other words, the S-shaped temporal pattern in aggr egate adoptions arises when product prices decrease over 
time and because consumers with different price sens itivities buy at different points of time during the 
product life cycle. In our setting, however, cons umers are myopic (i.e., do not hold future price 
expectations) but respond to previous cumulative adopters on account of “word of mouth” effects, 
consistent with the behavioral foundations of the BM. In fact, in one of its versions, our model 
mathematically reduces to the BM as a special case, while the utility-based  models of Song and Chintagunta 
(2003) and Melnikov (2012) would not. Further, tho se two papers do not study optimal dynamic pricing 
for a new product, which is the focus of our research. 

8 
 Krishnan, Seetharaman and Vakratsas (2012) study consumer adoption of SUVs using a two-stage 
model of demand, where the first-stage model pertains  to category adoption, and the second-stage pertains 
to brand choice. The first-stage model of category adoption is the BLDM , while the second-stage model of 
brand choice is a Multinomial Logit (MNL). Given our pa rtial overlap with the past research of Krishnan, 
Seetharaman and Vakratsas (2012), what distinguishes our research from theirs? We note four 
contributions: First, while Krishnan, S eetharaman and Vakratsas (2012) estimate the BLDM , they do not 
estimate the GBM on SUV adoptions data. Therefore, the empirical usefulness of the BLDM  relative to the 
GBM remains unknown. In this paper,  we explicitly compare the empirical  performance of the two models 
– BLDM  versus GBM – on various predictive metrics across multiple datasets and show that the BLDM  
vastly outperforms the GBM. We also show that the BLDM  better recovers the effects of price on new 
product adoption. Second, we offer two vers ions of the utility-based diffusion model, BGDM  (that is new 
to the literature and nests the or iginal BM as a special case) and BLDM , and compare their empirical 
performance. The BLDM  outperforms the BGDM  in terms of sales predictions and is, therefore, a more 
preferred version. Third, we illustrate how to ex tend the utility-based category adoption model to handle 
multiple brands in the category. On the other hand,  Krishnan, Seetharaman an d Vakratsas (2012) model 
brands’ market shares separately using a second-stage MNL model. Fourth, and most importantly, we study 
the normative usefulness of the utility-based diffu sion model vis-à-vis the GBM for marketing mix 
optimization. Unlike the GBM, which suffers from the weakness of being unable to provide a prescription 
for the optimal launch price (as shown by Fruchter and Van den Bulte 2011), the utility-based diffusion 
model, when used as an input to a price optimization algorithm, yields an optimal launch price, as well as 
an optimal price path, for the new product. Such price optimization was not undertaken by Krishnan, 
Seetharaman and Vakratsas (2012). We show how to undertake the price optimization using an easy-to-
implement numerical optimization algorithm (recently  developed by Cosguner, Chan and Seetharaman 
2018). This is the main contribution of this research. 
In sum, our key research contribution lies in en abling marketing mix optimization – yielding an 
optimal price path – for a new product using a pred ictive model of new product adoption that more 

9 
 accurately forecasts new product sales than existing mode ls. We use a recently proposed numerical dynamic 
optimization technique for this purpose. 
 
Proposed Utility-Based Generalizat ion of the Bass Diffusion Model 
We develop our model in four stages. First, we present the BM and its associated Non-linear Least 
Squares (NLS) estimation procedure for discrete-time  data, first proposed by Srinivasan and Mason (1986), 
and now commonly used to estimate the BM by resear chers and practitioners. Second, we show how to 
derive the discrete-time BM as a utility-based diffusion model. Third, we extend the utility-based BM to 
handle marketing variables to obtain the first version of the diffusion model, the Bass-Gumbel Diffusion 
Model  (BGDM ). Fourth, we present the second version of the diffusion model, the Bass-Logit Diffusion 
Model  (BLDM ). We discuss both the difference between BGDM  and BLDM  and the difference between 
BGDM  / BLDM  and the GBM. 
 
Step 1: Bass Model (BM) 
According to the BM (Bass 1969), in a market size of M consumers for a new product, the 
likelihood that a consumer w ill adopt the new product at time t, given that the consumer has not yet adopted, 
is given by the following equation. 
()() ,1( )ftpqF tFt         ( 1 )  
where p and q represent the coefficients of in novation and imitation, respectively, F(t) is the cumulative 
distribution function (cdf) and f(t) is the probability density function (pdf) characterizing the random 
variable t, which represents the consumer’s time to  adoption for the new product. Assuming F(0) = 0 and 
solving the differential equation (1) yields the following. 
()
()1() .
1pq t
pq teFtqep

         ( 2 )  

10 
 Since new product sales data are commonly available in discrete time intervals (such as quarters or years), 
the discrete-time version of the BM is commonly es timated using the non-linear least squares procedure, 
first proposed by Srinivasan and Mason (1986), by minimizing the following criterion function. 
2
1ˆ() () ,T
tSSE N t N t
         ( 3 )  
where T stands for the total number of periods fo r which new product sales data are available, N(t) 
represents the observed sales of the new product in period t, and 𝑁෡ሺ𝑡ሻ represents the predicted sales of the 
new product in period t, and is given by 
 ˆ() * () ( 1 ).Nt M Ft Ft          ( 4 )  
Minimizing the criterion function in equation (3) yields estimates of p, q, and M for the new product. Sales 
forecasts can then be generated fo r the new product for any period t, whether in sample or out of sample, 
using equation (4) above. When no past sales data are available on the new product, such as prior to the 
launch of the new product, sales data of comparable products, called “analogs,” are first used to estimate p 
and q for the analogs, after which a weighted average (where the weights represent similarities of the 
analogs to the new product) of the analogs’ p and q values is taken to represent p and q for the new product. 
M is estimated separately by combining information on  product purchase intent obtained from a consumer 
survey with census data using a chain-ratio method. These estimates of p, q, and M for the new product are 
then used to forecast new product sales, again using equation (4) above. Typically, practical applications 
of the BM rely on analog-based sales forecasting prio r to product launch, then use Bayesian updating of p, 
q and M after sales data begin to appear for the new produc t and eventually rely only on historical sales 
data of the new product to forecast future sales. 
 
Step 2: Deriving the Discrete-Time BM as a Utility-Based Diffusion Model 
In a market size of M consumers for a new product, suppose the utility of a consumer for the new 
product at time t is given by the following equation. 

11 
 1( 1 )ln ln ,1( )ttFtUFt        ( 5 )   
where the first term on the right-hand side, lnቂlnቄଵି୊ሺ୲ିଵሻ
ଵି୊ሺ୲ሻቅቃ, represented by Vt for short, represents the 
deterministic  attractiveness3 of the new product to the consumer at time t, F(t) represents the cdf given in 
equation (2), and t represents an unobserved (by the research er) random component that captures other 
influences on the consumer’s utility for the new pr oduct. If one assumes that the random component t 
follows a Gumbel distribution with location paramete r 0 and scale parameter 1, it can be shown that the 
consumer’s probability of buying the new product at time t, given that the consumer has not yet bought the 
new product, also called the discrete hazard function  characterizing the consumer’s time to adoption for 
the new product, is given by the following equation (Seetharaman 2004). 
Pr 1 ,Vte
t e         ( 6 )   
which, in turn, can be rewritten as follows. 
() ( 1 )Pr ,1( 1 )tFt Ft
Ft        ( 7 )   
which implies that the consumer’s probability  of not buying the new product at time t, given that the 
consumer has not yet bought the new product, also called the discrete survivor function  characterizing the 
consumer’s time to adoption for the new pr oduct, is given by the following equation. 
1( )1P r .1( 1 )tFt
Ft        ( 8 )  
The consumer’s unconditional likelihood of buying the new product at time t, also called the probability 
mass function  characterizing the consumer’s time to a doption for the new product, depends on the 
consumer’s discrete hazard and discr ete survivor functions, as follows. 
 1 P r ( 1 )*1 P r ( 2 )* . . . *1 P r ( 1 )* P r () ,tL tt          ( 9 )  
 
3 The deterministic attractiveness  term, which reflects the consumer’s intrinsic utility for the product, represents the discrete-time 
baseline hazard  of adoption (Krishnan, Seetharaman and Vakratsas 2012). It  is strictly increasing ove r time, which means that a 
consumer’s conditional probability of adopting the product, give n that adoption has not happened yet, increases over time. 

12 
 which can be rewritten, using equa tions (7) and (8), as follows. 
1( 1 ) 1( 2 ) 1( 1 ) ( )( 1 )** . . . * * ,1( 0 ) 1( 1 ) 1( 2 )1( 1 )tF F Ft Ft FtLF F Ft Ft          ( 1 0 )  
which reduces to the following. 
() ( 1 ) .tLF tF t          ( 1 1 )  
This implies that the predicted sales of the new product in period t is given by 
 ˆ() * () ( 1 ).Nt M Ft Ft          ( 1 2 )  
Equations (4) and (12) are identical.  This establishes that the discrete-time version of the BM can be 
derived as a utility-based diffusion model, as formulated in equation (5). This e quivalence between a utility-
based discrete choice model and the BM has not been  explicitly recognized in the marketing literature 
(except for Krishnan, Seetharaman and Vakratsas 201 2 where it is tacit in their model derivation). 
Intuitively, equation (5) can be understood as follows: Since F(t) is a monotonic increasing function of t, 
i.e., F(t) > F(t-1) , it follows that lnቂlnቄଵି୊ሺ୲ିଵሻ
ଵି୊ሺ୲ሻቅቃ is a monotonic increasing function of t. This means that 
the deterministic attractiveness of the new product to the consumer, Vt, is an increasing function of t, which, 
in turn, implies that the discrete hazard, Prt, is also an increasing function of t as per the continuous-time 
BM represented in equation (1). 
 
Step 3: Bass-Gumbel Diffusion Model (BGDM) 
In a market size of M consumers for a new product, suppose the utility of a consumer for the new 
product at time t is given by the following equation. 
t1( 1 )ln ln Price * ,1( )ttFtUFt       ( 1 3 )   
where Price t represents the price of the new product at time t and β represents the price sensitivity of the 
consumer, and the remaining terms are as in equati on (5). Under the same Gumb el distributional assumption 
for t as in equation (5), this  implies that the consumer’s probability of buying the new product at time t, 

13 
 given that the consumer has not yet bought the new product, also called the discrete hazard function  
characterizing the consumer’s time to adoption for th e new product, is given by the following equation. 
Pr 1 ,Wte
t e         ( 1 4 )   
where 
t1( 1 )ln ln Price * .1( )tFtWFt      ( 1 5 )   
The consumer’s unconditional likeliho od of buying the new product at time t is as follows. 
1
11P r ( ) * P r ( ) ,t
t
uL ut
         ( 1 6 )  
and the predicted sales of the new product in period t is, therefore, 
ˆ() * .t Nt M L           ( 1 7 )  
The criterion function in equation (3) is minimized to estimate the parameters -- p, q, M,   -- of this 
diffusion model, that we call the BGDM . This model reduces to the traditional BM when β = 0. In this 
sense, the BGDM  generalizes the BM (as does the GBM) by nesting the BM as a special case. 
What if no past sales data are available on the new product, such as prior to the launch of the new 
product? 4 In that case, sales data of comparable products,  called “analogs,” can be first used to estimate p 
and q for the analogs, after which a weighted average,  where the weights represent similarities of the 
analogs to the new product, of the analogs’ p and q values is taken to represent p and q for the new product. 
This is the standard appr oach taken to estimating  p and q in the absence of past sales data under the BM 
(see Ofek 2008 for details). The remaining parameters, M and , can be estimated using a discrete choice , 
also called choice-based conjoint , survey (see Louviere, Hensher and Swait 2000), which is conducted as 
follows. First, the new product prototype, in real or vi rtual form, is shown to respondents so that they fully 
understand the functional features of the new product.  Second, respondents undertake 18 choice tasks, 
 
4 We thank an anonymous reviewer for raising this important ques tion about the practical usability of the diffusion model in the  
absence of historical sales data. 

14 
 divided in to 6 sets of 3 choice tasks each. Each set of 3 choice tasks represents a subsequent year, when 
compared to the previous set of 3 choice tasks, since hypothetical introduction of the new product. For 
example, in the first 3 choice tasks, the respondent is told that the new product has just been launched during 
the current year; in the next 3 choice tasks, the res pondent is told that the new product was launched during 
the previous year; in the last set of 3 choice tasks, the respondent is told that the new product was launched 
6 years prior to the current year. The respondent is also  asked to assume that he or she has not yet adopted 
the new product while responding to each choice task. Within each choice task, which represents a specific 
period t since launch, the respondent is shown a particular  version of the new product, defined in terms of 
how long ago it was introduced (as explained above), as well as two other specific attributes: (1) installed 
base of existing adopters ( M * F(t) ), and (2) price of the new product ( Price t). The respondent is then asked 
for their likelihood ( Prt) of adopting that version of the new product. 
In sum, in the discrete choice survey, as discussed above, the 18 versions of the new product differ 
in terms of lnቂlnቄଵି୊ሺ୲ିଵሻ
ଵି୊ሺ୲ሻቅቃ, and Price t, which are the two covariates on the right-hand side of equation 
(13). The respondent’s likelihood of adoption for each ve rsion of the new product serves as the empirical 
measure of Prt, which is on the left-hand side of equation (14). We now have a survey-based counterpart 
dataset to proxy for the absent historical sales data , which can be used to estimate the parameters  and M 
of the BGDM , using equations (15) - (17). In this ma nner, one can estimate the parameters -- p, q, M,   -- 
of the BGDM  in the absence of historical sales data on the new product. 
 
Step 4: Bass-Logit Diffusion Model (BLDM) 
Suppose the utility function in equation (13) still app lies, but we assume that the random component, t, 
follows the Logistic (rather than Gumbel) distribu tion with location parameter 0 and scale parameter 1. 
This implies that the consumer’s probab ility of buying the new product at time t, given that the consumer 
has not yet bought the new product, also called the discrete hazard function  characterizing the consumer’s 
time to adoption for the new product, is given by the following equation. 

15 
 Pr ,1t
tW
t We
e        ( 1 8 )   
where Wt is given by equation (15). We call this model the BLDM . This model has been previously 
estimated on SUV adoption data by Krishnan, Seetha raman and Vakratsas (2012). The only feature that 
distinguishes the BLDM  from the BGDM  is the assumption about the random component, t. Equations (16) 
and (17) still apply and the criterion function in equati on (3) is still minimized to estimate the parameters 
of the BLDM . Unlike the BGDM , the BLDM  will not reduce to the traditional BM when β = 0. However, it 
will reduce to a logistic counterpart of the discrete- time BM instead. Since the l ogit model is a workhorse 
random utility model in the marketing literature, inspired by the seminal work of Luce (1958) and a highly 
cited empirical application by Guadagni and Little  (1983), we offer this version as an alternative 
formulation of the utility-based diffusion model even though it does not nest the BM as a special case. 
As a comparison model, which presents an altern ative way of incorporating marketing variables 
within the BM (as opposed to the derived utility-b ased diffusion model), we present the GBM below. The 
cdf characterizing the consumer’s time to adoption of the new product under the GBM specification is, 
() ( )
() ( )1() ,
1pqXt
pqXteFtqep

        ( 1 9 )  
where 
0Price() l n ,PricetXt t
        ( 2 0 )  
where Price 0 is the launch price for the new product (whi ch needs to be assumed to be equal to Price 1 in 
the estimation of the GBM; even more importantly, the value of Price 0 needs to be assumed, rather than 
explicitly optimized, while deriving the optimal pric ing policy using the GBM, as explained earlier). We 
estimate the GBM using equations (3) and (4) as well. 
   

16 
 Model Discussion 
The utility-based diffusion model that we have deri ved, on account of having a utility foundation, 
makes it natural to incorporate marketing variables in the usual additive manne r within the consumer’s 
utility function (see equation (13)).  The GBM, on the other hand, does not operationalize marketing 
variables within the BM framework using a behavior-the oretic foundation. It simply  embeds the effects of 
marketing variables on the adoption hazard using a multip licative function. In fact, it is not possible to 
easily derive the discrete-time GBM as a utility-based  diffusion model (in the same manner as we derive 
the discrete-time BM as a utility-based diffusion model). In addition to the marke ting mix, the utility-based 
diffusion model can also incorporate market charact eristics, category characteristics and macro-economic 
variables, if available, to affect the consumer’s utility function by including them, for example, in linear 
additive form in equation (13). Some of these variable s can be categorical, and some could represent fixed 
effects if necessary. It is unclear how one would include such variables, especially if  they are time-invariant, 
in a behavior-theoretic manner within the GBM. One could also use control func tion approaches to correct 
for possible endogeneity of marketing variables (if suitabl e instruments are available) by including the fitted 
residuals from the instrumental variable regressions as additional explanatory variables in the consumer’s 
utility function. Endogeneity correction in the GBM, however, is a non-trivial task. 
It is useful to note that Bass, Jain and Krishnan (2000) propose a discrete-time Proportional Hazard 
Model (PHM) as an alternative diffusion model to th e GBM. However, their proposed PHM does not reduce 
to the BM as a special case. Since the BM has long-standing precedent in the diffusion literature and has 
enjoyed great success in new product forecasting a pplications, we retain the BM within the BGDM  as a 
special case. In the absence of  marketing variables, the BGDM  reduces to the traditional BM. Our goal is 
to exploit the excellent forecasting properties of the ad option hazard that is implied by the BM, while also 
additionally modeling the effects of marketing variab les so that our model can be used for prescriptive 
decision-making. An added benefit of the utility-ba sed diffusion model is that it can handle multiple, 
competing new products as we illustrate in our “Optim al Dynamic Pricing Policies” section, while the GBM 
cannot. This makes the utility-based diffusion model more convenient for practical use since many new 

17 
 product categories involve multiple, competing new produc ts diffusing simultaneously in the market (e.g., 
iPhone, Samsung Galaxy, LG Tracfone etc.). Last, but not least, since the utility-based extension of the BM 
makes specific parametric assumptions (Gumbel or Logi stic) about the utility function, the model can also 
be estimated using maximum likelihood (rather than least squares), which makes it easy to incorporate 
random coefficients, using discrete or continuous mixt ure distributions, to reflect unobserved heterogeneity 
across consumers. 
It is useful to note that the Gumbel (for BGDM ) and Logistic (for BLDM) distributions of error 
terms yield convenient closed-form expressions for c onsumer adoption probabilities (see equations (14 and 
(18)). Our choice of the Logistic error distribution is consistent with an extensiv e literature in marketing, 
statistics and econometrics on discret e choice models. Our choice of Gumbel distribution allows us to 
establish a random utility foundation for the widely used BM (as shown earlier). Furthermore, there is rich 
precedence in the econometrics literature for the choice of  Gumbel errors in duration time models (see, for 
example, Heckman and Singer 1984, Meyer 1990 , Han and Hausman 1990 for applications to 
unemployment durations). Extreme va lue distributions are the limiting distributions for the maximum of a 
very large collection of random observations from the same arbitrary distribution. Gumbel (1958) showed 
that for any well-behaved initial distribution of un observed random errors, the Gumbel distribution is 
sufficient as such a limiting distributio n. In the case of duration time m odels, extreme value distributions 
for the maximum apply. For example, if there are n unobserved influences on co nsumer adoption time, and 
consumer utility for the product crosses the adoption threshold as long as the maximum of these influences 
becomes sufficiently large, then extreme value theory implies that independent of the choice of component 
errors, the maximum will approach Gumbel as n becomes large. This provides a behavioral basis for the 
Gumbel error term in the BGDM . As far as the BLDM  is concerned, because the L ogistic error term can be 
shown to be a difference of two Gumbel error term s, if one views not only the random utility of the BLDM  
as Gumbel, but also the adoption threshold of the BLDM  as Gumbel (instead of deterministic), then the 
BLDM  can also be motivated as arising from a Gumbel specification of error terms. 
 

18 
 Benefit of the BGDM  and BLDM  over the GBM in the Case of No Past Data 
In the absence of historical sales data, such as prior to the launch of the new product, one can 
estimate the parameters of the BGDM  or BLDM , including specifically the price sensitivity parameter ( ), 
using discrete choice survey data, as discussed earlier. Su ch estimation is facilitated by the fact that choice-
based conjoint relies on random utility primitives, as do BGDM  and BLDM . However, under the GBM , 
which does not have a random utility  foundation, it is unclear how one  would take the market price 
sensitivity that is estimated using a conjoint survey  and convert it to yield the price parameter of the GBM . 
In other words, the GBM  appears unusable in the absence of histori cal sales data. In this sense, the strength 
of BGDM  and BLDM  over the GBM  becomes even greater in the absence of past sales data. 
 
Empirical Results 
We have discussed the theoretical merits of th e utility-based diffusion model we derive. Now we 
study how this model fares, relative to comparis on models (BM and GBM), in explaining actual new 
product sales data. For this purpose, we employ annual new product adoptions data, along with annual 
average prices, pertaining to four categories of dur able goods: Color TV, Air Conditioner, Clothes Dryer 
and Freezer. The reason for choosing th ese categories is that three of th ese categories (except freezer) were 
used in the first empirical application of the GBM by Bass, Krishnan and Jain (1994). All four categories 
were used in a recent application of the GBM by Ji ang, Bass and Bass (2006). We use the exact same 
datasets that have been used in these previous papers. 
We compare the empirical performance of the tw o versions of the utility-based diffusion model – 
BGDM  and BLDM  -- versus two comparison models, BM and GBM. The results of fit comparisons are 
given in Table 1. In terms of the fit criterion (SSE), we see that the BLDM  does the best, while the BGDM  
does second best, in three out of four categories (AC, Dryer, Freezer). Not surprisi ngly, since it ignores the 
effects of prices, the BM does the worst in all 4 cate gories. Interestingly, in the only category (Color TV) 
where the GBM outperforms the utility-based diffusion m odel, its superior perfo rmance is only marginal 
(SSE of 402,514 for GBM versus 457,051 for BGDM ), in sharp contrast to the utility-based model vastly 

19 
 outperforming the GBM in the remaining thr ee categories (for example, SSE of 89,550 for BLDM  versus 
294,659 for GBM in the Air Conditioners  category). This reveals that the utility-based diffusion model is 
able to much better explain new produc t adoption patterns than the GBM. 
[Insert Table 1 here] 
It is possible that an in-sample fit criterion may exaggerate the superior empirical performance of 
the utility-based diffusion model versus the GBM and BM . For this reason, we additionally compare model 
performance using out-of-sample holdout predictions. For this purpose, we re-estimate all four diffusion 
models using only the first 80 % of the observations in the data (training sample), and then use the estimates 
to makes predictions of sales in each of the last 20 % of observations in the data (holdout validation sample). 
Table 2 provides the results from the holdout validation comparison, period by period for each product 
category. The table shows that the predicted sales yielded by the BLDM  comes closer to the actual sales in 
11 out of the 12 cases, when compared  to the predictions yielded by the other models. In the only case 
where BLDM  does not yield the best prediction, the BGDM  does the best. In other words, both versions of 
the utility-based diffusion model yield sales predictions th at are closer to the actual sales data in the holdout 
validation sample in all cases when compared to th e GBM or BM. This strongly vindicates the forecasting 
performance of the utility-based diffusion model. On th e basis of these findings, we propose that even if 
one’s purpose is to only forecast new product sales, and not optimize the new product’s marketing mix, 
BGDM  and BLDM  must be preferred to the GBM. 5 
[Insert Table 2 here] 
Next, we compare the prediction performance of th e three diffusion models that incorporate price 
– BLDM , BGDM , GBM -- using k-fold cross validation. We do this in two ways: (1) Leave one out, and 
(2) Leave two out. In (1) we leave one observation out within each validat ion fold, and in (2) we leave two 
observations out within each validation fold. Given N ob servations in a category dataset, this results in N 
 
5 We also perform holdout predictions using the first 60%, 70%, a nd 90% of the data as training  samples, and find that the BLDM  
/ BGDM  outperform the BM / GBM in 75%, 92%, and 75% of the cas es, respectively. Please see our Web Appendix A for the 
details of these additional holdout validations. 

20 
 folds in (1) and N*(N-1) / 2 folds in (2). Within each holdout fold, we predict the outcome(s). Table 3 
provides the results from the k-fold cr oss validation, reporting the percenta ge of times across all folds that 
each model is the “best” in terms of predicting valida tion outcomes. We find that one of the utility-based 
diffusion models – BLDM  or BGDM  – outperforms the GBM in a majority of the cases for each category, 
in both (1) and (2). For example,  in the clothes dryer category, in the leave two out case, either BLDM  or 
BGDM  best predicts validation outcomes 72 % of the time while the GBM wins 28 % of the time. These 
results further highlight the practical usefulness of the utility-based diffusion models for prediction 
purposes. 
[Insert Table 3 here] 
We report the estimated parame ters – innovation coefficient ( p), imitation coefficient ( q), market 
potential ( M), and price sensitivity ( β) – for each model in Table 4. We see that the estimated price 
sensitivity ( β) is negative and significant for each category, as expected, under the BGDM  and BLDM . This 
means that as price of the new product decreases (i ncreases), its adoption speed accelerates (decelerates). 
However, under the GBM, the estimated  price coefficient is insignificant in three out of four categories 
(except Color TV). This means that  using the GBM, one could spuriously conclude that price does not 
significantly influence new product adoption even t hough our utility-based diffusion model may suggest 
otherwise. The estimated market potential ( M) is lower under the GBM and BM than under the utility-based 
diffusion model in three out of four categories (except fr eezer). To investigate this issue further, we look at 
the re-estimated values of M in the training sample (i.e., first 80 % of observations), as opposed to the full 
sample. These are reported in Table 4(b). For all four  categories, we note a systematic and large downward 
bias in the estimated values of M under the GBM and BM. This is consis tent with the findings in Van den 
Bulte and Lilien (1997) that the estimated value of M goes systematically downward as one right-truncates 
the observed diffusion data. The two versions of the utility-based diffusion model, on the other hand, yield 
roughly similar estimates of M for two categories, and understated, albeit much less so than the GBM and 
BM, estimates for the other two categories. This hi ghlights an additional benefit to using either the BGDM  
or BLDM , i.e., robustness to minor right truncations in the data. 

21 
 [Insert Table 4 here] 
It is difficult to directly interpret the estimated p and q coefficients in Table 4. Therefore, we convert 
these estimates to probability densities of adoption tim es (under the assumption that price stays at the 
introductory price, so that we are able to isolate th e intrinsic adoption pattern, absent price effects), using 
the formulas in equations (11) and (16), for the BM / GBM and the BGDM  / BLDM , respectively. First, we 
note that the estimated probability density is almost identical between the BM and GBM, and between the 
BGDM  and BLDM . However, there are significant differences between the probability densities yielded by 
the BGDM  / BLDM  versus those yielded by the BM / GBM.  For two categories (Color TV and Air 
Conditioner), the BGDM  / BLDM  implies a much longer, and therefor e slower, adoption cycle, versus the 
BM / GBM (“fatter tails”). For one category (Freezer), we find the reverse, with the BM / GBM implying 
a longer adoption cycle. For one category (Clothes Dr yer), the estimated probability densities do not differ 
by much across the four models. While there is no syst ematic pattern in these diffe rences, it is interesting 
to see that the utility-based diffusion model yields a di fferent intrinsic adoption pattern (which is still 
formulated as following a Bass curve when marketing va riables are absent) when compared to the BM or 
GBM. Therefore, beyond the superiority in  forecasting performance discussed earlier, BGDM  / BLDM  yield 
different intrinsic adoption patterns than the GB M. In other words, th e descriptive content of BGDM  / 
BLDM  is different from that of the GBM. 
Some comments are in order here. It is useful to note that the BGDM  without price is 
mathematically equivalent to the BM and, therefore, would yield the same estimates of p, q, M as the BM. 
Therefore, the only reason that the estimates of p, q, M yielded by the BGDM  are different from those 
yielded by the BM is the inclusion of price in BGDM . In other words, the observed differences in the 
estimates of p, q, M between the BGDM  and BM is on account of omitted variable bias  in the BM. That 
said, it is interesting to note that the estimates of p, q, M yielded by GBM do not differ that much from 
those yielded by the BM. In other words, the effects of omitted variable bias do not seem to show up when 
comparing the GBM to the BM. Why is  this the case? Our explanation is  that since the GBM incorporates 
the effect of price by linearly adding the percentage ch ange in price (scaled by the price coefficient) to 

22 
 calendar time, there is little to no consequence of igno ring price in the GBM when percentage change in 
price is almost collinear with the time variable. This, in turn, makes the estimated parameters p, q and M 
immune to whether or not price is included in the GBM. In BGDM  / BLDM , however, price is included as 
an absolute measure, rather than as a percentage change, within the utility function. Additionally, time is 
represented non-linearly in the utility function using the ln [ln (.)] term, which means that there is no 
collinearity between how price versus elapsed time ar e allowed to influence adoption. Therefore, the BGDM  
/ BLDM  successfully identify the effects of price on adoption in all four categories, unlike the GBM which 
fails to identify significant price effects in three out of four categories. 
[Insert Figure 1 here] 
In order to further elucidate the subs tantive implications of the estimated p and q coefficients, we 
compute the predicted peak adoptio n time based on the estimated mode l parameters, and present them in 
Table 5. First, we note that the predicted peak adoption times from the BGDM  / BLDM  exactly agree with 
the observed peak adoption times in 3 out of 4 categor ies (Color TV, Air Conditioner, Clothes Dryer). In 
the fourth category (Freezer), the predicted peak adopti on time is slightly (by one period) larger than the 
observed value. In sharp contrast, the predicted p eak adoption time from the BM / GBM agrees with the 
observed peak adoption time in only one category (Col or TV). In the second and third categories (Air 
Conditioner, Clothes Dryer), the BM / GBM overestim ate the peak adoption times by two periods, while 
in the fourth category (Freezer), the BM / GBM under estimate the peak adoption time (by 2 periods for the 
BM, and by 4 periods for the GBM). In sum, the BGDM  / BLDM  are able to predict peak adoption times 
much more accurately than the BM / GBM. This further vindicates the managerial usefulness of the utility-
based diffusion model. We also predict the “lifetim e” of the adoption lifecycle for each product using the 
number of periods until the number of adoptions in a pe riod falls to less than 10 (see Table 5). For 3 out of 
4 categories, we see that the BGDM  / BLDM  predict a much longer adoption lifetime (1.5 – 2 times) than 
what is predicted by the BM / GBM. To the extent that peak adoption times are more accurately predicted 
by BGDM  / BLDM , one must place more faith on their predictions of adoption lifetimes as well. 

23 
 In Table 5, we also report the predicted number of adoptions during the predicted peak time of 
adoptions. For 2 out of 4 categories (Color TV, Air Conditioners), the predictions of BGDM  / BLDM  come 
closer to the observed numbers of adoptions, while fo r the remaining 2 categories (Clothes Dryer, Freezer), 
the GBM makes closer predictions. On  average, across the 4 categories, BGDM  / BLDM  yield a lower 
prediction error than the BM / GBM. 6 
[Insert Table 5 here] 
 
Optimal Dynamic Pricing Policies 
We have already shown in section 4 that BGDM  / BLDM  have excellent forecasting properties 
using empirical data. Now we derive the prescriptive pricing policies that are implied by the utility-based 
diffusion model under various ranges of model para meters. For this purpose, we assume that the innovator 
firm maximizes the revenue yielded by their product. In  reality, it is more likely that the innovator firm 
maximizes profit, rather than revenue. However, we observe neither the firm’s actual marginal cost of 
producing the product, nor the dependence of such marg inal cost on the quantity produced (“economies of 
scale”) and the firm’s production experience in the cat egory (i.e., “experience curve effects”). Therefore, 
in the absence of a known marginal cost function char acterizing the firm, we cannot correctly specify the 
firm’s profit function far less maximize it. For this pur pose, we use revenue maximization to illustrate our 
price optimization approach. It is easy to use our pric ing approach to handle prof it maximization: one would 
simply replace the objective function to reflect profit rather than revenue. For these numerical simulations, 
we use a modified version of the dynamic optimiz ation algorithm developed in Cosguner, Chan and 
Seetharaman (2018) and use the BLDM  version -- which has been previously used by Krishnan, 
Seetharaman and Vakratsas (2012) -- of the utility-based  diffusion model. In the following subsections, we 
 
6 To illustrate the superior  predictive performance of BGDM  / BLDM , we compare them with earlier diffusion and proportional 
hazard models in literature. Please see our Web Appendix B for th e details of this comparison exercise. In an additional analys is, 
we use two recent datasets and illustrate BGDM  / BLDM’s  superior performance as opposed to GBM. Please see our Web Appendix 
C for the details of this exercise.  

24 
 discuss our dynamic optimization algorithm first, supply -side implications for an innovator firm next, and 
the extension of our dynamic pricing appr oach to handle multiple products last. 
 
Numerical Optimization Algorithm to Solve an Innovator Firm’s Dynamic Pricing Problem 
The pricing objective of the innovator fi rm selling the new product is as follows. 
ሼPriceଵ, Priceଶ,…,P r i c e ୘ሽൌargmax∑ρ୲ିଵ୘
୲ୀଵ∗Price୲∗N୲,    ( 2 1 )  
where 𝜌 is the time discount factor, 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒௧ is the price of the new product at time t, and 𝑁௧ is the expected 
sales at time t. In this setting, the revenue maximizer firm’s decision for the current price affects not only 
the current period revenue, but also the revenue stream in the future through chan ging the remaining market 
potential for the new product. The relevant state variables ( Z) for the innovator firm’s dynamic pricing 
problem are, therefore, time and th e remaining market potential, i.e., Z୲ൌሼt, R୲ሽ, where R୲ൌMെ
∑ N୩୲ିଵ
୩ୀଵ . In order to find the optimal pricing policy function for the new product, we adapt the dynamic 
optimization algorithm developed in Cosguner, Chan and Seetharaman (2018). First, we parameterize the 
firm’s temporal pricing policy as a flexible function of the state variables, Z, as shown below. 
PriceൌPrıce෣ሺZ|θሻ,          ( 2 2 )  
where Prıce෣ሺ.ሻ denotes a flexible parametric approxima tion of the firm’s pricing policy, and 𝜃 is a vector 
of parameters characterizing this parametric  approximation. In order to find the true 𝜃 for a given set of 
diffusion parameters and the discount factor, i.e., ( 𝑝,𝑞,𝑀,𝛽 and 𝜌), we numerically search for 𝜃 that 
maximizes the lifetime product revenue. This requires us to calculate the lifetime revenue for each candidate 
value of 𝜃. To do that, we use the following forward simulation algorithm. 
 For each candidate value of 𝜃: 
i. Start with the first period, i.e., Zଵൌሼtൌ1, RଵൌMሽ. Given Zଵ, calculate Priceଵൌ
Prıce෣ሺZଵ|θሻ. Given Priceଵ and Zଵ, calculate the first period sales, NଵሺPriceଵ,Zଵሻ, using 
equation (4) or (17) for the BM / GBM or BGDM  / BLDM , respectively. 

25 
 ii. Given Zଶൌሼtൌ2, RଶൌMെNଵሽ, calculate the second period price, Priceଶൌ
Prıce෣ሺZଶ|θሻ. Given Priceଶ and Zଶ, calculate the second period sales, NଶሺPriceଶ,Zଶሻ, using 
equation (4) or (17). 
iii. Repeat (ii) until an iteration T such that R୘ൌMെ∑ N୩ൎ0୘ିଵ
୩ୀଵ .  
iv. Calculate the discounted sum of revenues, i.e., ∑ρ୲ିଵ୘
୲ୀଵ∗Price୲∗N୲. That will be the 
lifetime revenue for the given policy function Prıce෣ሺZ|θሻ. 
For our implementation, we use the second order polynom ial approximation with interaction terms for the 
parameterized policy function (i.e., 𝜃 contains an intercept parame ter, and slope parameters for t, 𝑅௧, t2, 
𝑅௧2, t*𝑅௧). Since the state transitions are deterministic, an d the market is fully covered within a limited 
number of iterations, the simulation exercise becomes extr emely fast. In other words, the user can recover 
the optimal path of prices within a few seconds usi ng a programming environment such as R (please consult 
Web Appendix D for the sample R code). This is a computationally convenient solution to the firm’s 
dynamic optimization problem which is easy for manage rs to use. We discuss the supply-side pricing 
implications next. 
 
Optimal Dynamic Pricing Implica tions for the Innovator Firm 
First, we report the optimal price paths, alongside the actual price paths (as observed in the data), 
for all four categories in Figure 2. The key take-aways  of Figure 2 are as follows: First, the optimal price 
path is non-monotonic, first increasing and then decreasi ng over time, in each of the four categories. The 
non-monotonicity is most pronounced in the Color TV cat egory, with an introductory price of $580 quickly 
rising to $850 by period 9, and then gradually decreasi ng to $745 by period 25. The dynamic price path is 
most shallow in the Clothes Dryer category in the sense that price shows only a minor initial rise and 
subsequent fall over time. 7 Plots like these, which represent dynamic optimal pricing policies, can be useful 
 
7 Since the recovered price path is a function of estimated mo del parameters, which are associat ed with standard errors, we 
undertake sensitivity analysis to study the impact of model uncertainty. Web Appendix E reports the optimal price paths based o n 
 

26 
 to managers in innovator firms in terms of enablin g related marketing decisions, such as advertising and 
sales planning, to be congruent with the prices. Second, consistent with the optimal price paths, we observe 
that actual price paths are non-monotonic – first increasing and then decreasing – in the Clothes Dryer and 
Freezer categories. However, they ar e steadily decreasing in the Color TV and Air Conditioner categories. 
In three out of four categories – Color TV, Clothes Dr yer, Freezer – the actual prices are consistently lower 
than the actual prices. In the Air Conditioner categor y, however, the actual prices are higher than optimal 
prices in early periods, and lower in later periods. 
One should not interpret the observed differences  between optimal and actual price paths, 
especially with regard to their shapes – nonmonotoni c optimal prices, versus monotonically decreasing 
actual prices – in two categories, as speaking to the f ace validity (or lack thereof) of our price optimization 
approach. Our intent in this research  is not to descriptively explain the observed price patterns in the data. 
Instead, our goal is to provide an easy-to-implemen t normative algorithm for price optimization that uses 
the descriptively appropriate new product adoption model as an input. As discussed earlier, the actual prices 
in the data are most likely a consequence of profit maximization on the part of the innovator firm, while we 
wrongly assume revenue maximization in our numerical simulation. It would require conversations with 
industry managers who were managi ng product pricing in those categories during the early years of 
adoption in order for us to understand the (possibly tim e-varying) marginal cost function characterizing the 
product. Using that information and rerunning our nu merical simulation using a suitably specified profit 
function would then allow us to derive the optimal pri ce path for a profit maximization objective. That said, 
we provide a speculative explanation for the actua l price path seen in our data: Suppose the seller 
experiences declining costs over time (“experience curve” effect), and we assume that their profit margin 
(m) increases over time as follows: m = 1 – [0.9 / (t0.1)]. Under this assumption, and additionally assuming 
 
the estimated 95 % confidence intervals for p and q. The resu lts suggest the following: (1) the 95% prediction bands are quite 
“tight” for p, which means that the impact of uncertainty in th e estimated value of p on optimal prices is minimal, (2) the 95%  
prediction band is wider for q, but not wo rrisomely wide due to parameter uncertainty. For example, the maximum price over the 
dynamic price path varies from $ 770 (lower bound) versus $880 (upper bound) in the Color TV category, or a difference of $110, 
on account of model uncertainty. In practice, the risk aversion a nd objective functions of managers will determine how they mak e 
use of this uncertainty in pricing prescrip tions and its effect on the category profit. 

27 
 that the seller maximizes profit (rather than revenue),  we find that optimal prices decrease over time for 
various values of p and q. 8 Therefore, one explanation for the decreasing temporal path of prices that are 
observed in the data is the existence of experience curv e effects. Since we do not observe seller costs in our 
data, we are unable to empirically verify whether this  explanation is indeed correct. In practice, however, 
sellers can use the suggested dynamic pricing approach to maximize profit (rather than revenue, as we do 
in this study). It is important to note that the sugge sted price optimization approach can yield different 
shapes – decreasing, increasing, flat, U-shaped, invert ed U-shaped etc. -- for the optimal price paths 
depending on both the parameters of the new prod uct adoption model, as well as the objective function 
being maximized by the firm. 
[Insert Figure 2 here] 
Next, we derive the optimal dynamic pricing poli cy that is implied by the GBM in order to 
understand differences in its pr icing implications from the BLDM . For this purpose, we assume the 
introductory price (Price 0) to be the observed introductory pric e in the data (since the GBM requires 
introductory price to be exogenously pre-specified as discussed in the introduction section). Since the 
estimated effect of price under the GBM is significan t only in the Color TV category, we perform this 
exercise in that category. The optimal price path im plied by the GBM is shown in Figure 3 (alongside that 
implied by the BLDM ). We note substantively significant differe nces in the pricing implications of the 
GBM when compared to those of the BLDM . Specifically, the BLDM  suggests an increase in price of the 
product from $580 to $850 over the first 9 periods beyond which the recommended price gradually 
decreases to $745 by period 25. In contrast, the GBM suggests a modest initial increase in price from $610 
to $640 over the first 4 periods beyond which the re commended price falls steeply to $200 by period 25. 
This results in 13.8 % lower lifetime revenues than those yielded by the optimal price path determined using 
the BLDM . This exercise reiterates the importance of ha ving an accurate estimate of price on adoption in 
deriving normative pricing prescr iptions for new products. 
 
8 The results of these numerical simulati ons are reported in our Web Appendix F. 

28 
 [Insert Figure 3 here] 
Next we study the impact of p and q on the optimal pricing policy. We keep M and β at the average 
of their estimated values across the four categories (30,880 and -0.005, respectively). Based on the range 
of estimated values of p and q across the four categories, we choose the following three possible values for 
p: 0.01 (low), 0.04 (medium), 0.07 (high), and the following three possible values for q: 0.4 (low), 0.7 
(medium), 1.0 (high). This yields nine possible combinations of p and q. We present the implied optimal 
pricing policies for these nine conditions in Figure 4. We see that at low values of q, the optimal pricing 
policy shows a price increase for several (10-15) periods  after launch after which price flattens out and 
remains roughly constant over time.  At medium and high values of q, the optimal pricing policy is non-
monotonic, i.e., initially increasing then  decreasing. At medium values of q, the launch price is higher than 
that at low values of q, and the subsequent price increase is also steeper, but the increase does not last for 
long. Between 7 and 12 periods after launch, the price reaches its peak and starts  decreasing. These effects 
get even more pronounced at high values of q, i.e., higher launch price, stee per subsequent price increase, 
and faster subsequent turnaround. Holding  p constant, changing q from low (medium) to medium (high) 
shifts the optimal price policy upward in a more pronounced manner than changing p from low (medium) 
to medium (high) at a constant q. As long as q is high, the eventual price path is downward sloping. 
However, a decreasing optimal pricing policy from the time of launch is never f ound to be optimal under 
any combination of p and q. The reason for this, which we uncover us ing numerical simulations, is that we 
assume that revenue maximization governs the firm’s pricing objective (since we do not know the firm’s 
cost function). On the other hand, as discussed earlier, if profit maximization is the firm’s objective and the 
firm has a steep experiential learni ng curve for the marginal cost of production for its new product, we 
uncover declining optimal pricing policies (please see our  Web Appendix F for the details of this exercise). 
Our dynamic optimization method can still be applied under such a scenario. Our main contribution is to 
provide an easy-to-use prescriptive anal ytics template, as described in  the previous section, where a 
dynamically optimal pricing policy can be numerically derived by a manager for their new product using 

29 
 the utility-based extension of the BM, as long as the manager has estimates of ( 𝑝,𝑞,𝑀,𝛽), for their new 
product based on either historical data or product analogs and surveys.  
[Insert Figure 4 here] 
Next, we study the impact of the price sensitivity ( β) on the optimal pricing policy. We keep p and 
q at the average of their estimated values across the four categories (0 .03 and 0.65, respectively). Based on 
the estimated values of β across the four categories, we let β vary from a low value of -0.001 to a high value 
of -0.01. We present the implied introductory prices in Figure 5 (the optimal price paths are non-monotonic, 
i.e., first increasing and then decreasing,). We see a steep  decline in the implied introductory price as the 
market becomes more price sensitive (varying from $3500 to $500). Beyond a th reshold level of price 
sensitivity (-0.003 or so), the decrease in optim al introductory price almost flattens out. It is useful to note 
here that managers can explicitly derive optimal intr oductory prices for their new products, as illustrated 
here, based on the utility-based extensi on of the BM, something that is impossible using the GBM (where 
only the post-launch price path, conditional on an assu med introductory price, can be derived from the 
model).  
 [Insert Figure 5 here] 
Next, we study the impact of the firm’s time discount factor ( ρ) on the optimal pricing policy. We 
let ρ vary from 0 to 1. We present the implied introductor y prices in Figure 6 (the optimal price paths are 
non-monotonic, i.e., first increasing and then decreasi ng,). We see a very slow increase in the implied 
introductory price as the discount factor increases from 0 (myopic) to about 0.7, and then a steep increase 
thereafter. For example, an increase of the discount factor from 0.8 to 0.9 implies an increase in the 
introductory price from about $250 to $325. We present Figures 5 and 6 mainly to demonstrate that the 
optimal launch price, a key strategic lever in a new product manager’s list of responsibilities, can be 
calculated using the utility-based exte nsion of the BM for any combinati on of market and firm parameters. 
The GBM cannot be used for this purpose. The GBM requires an assumed  launch price even to compute 
an optimal post-launch price path. 
 [Insert Figure 6 here] 

30 
 Extension of The Dynamic Pricing A pproach to Handle Multiple Products 
In some product categories, multiple competitors la unch new products at the same time, in which 
case consumers must decide which of multiple (if any) products to adopt at any point of time. One can 
handle this by extending the derived random utility model ( BGDM  / BLDM ) to include all available 
products, in addition to the no purchase option, as choi ce alternatives for consumers. Let us consider, for 
example, the two product case. Under the BLDM , this yields the following choice probabilities, Pr1t, Pr2t 
and Pr0t, for consumer adoption for either of the two av ailable products, or the no-purchase option, at time 
t. 
1
012
2
012
0
0121
2
0Pr ,
Pr ,
Pr ,t
tt t
t
tt t
t
tt tW
t WWW
W
t WWW
W
t WW We
eee
e
eee
e
eee

        ( 2 3 )   
where W1t, W2t and W0t are, in turn, represented by the following equations. 
11 1 t
22 2 t
0Price * ,
Price * ,
1( 1 )ln ln ,1( )t
t
tW
W
FtWFt 


        ( 2 4 )   
In other words, this extended version of BLDM  embeds the category-specific diffusion component, 
lnሾlnሼሾ1െFሺtെ1ሻሿ/ሾ1െFሺtሻሿሽሿ, within the no-purchase option’s deterministic utility, W0t, while 
allowing consumers’ intrinsic preferences, 1 and 2, to be asymmetric across the two products. The 
consumer’s unconditiona l likelihood of adopting each product at time t is as follows. 
1
10 1
1
1
20 2
1Pr *Pr ,
Pr *Pr ,t
tu t
u
t
tu t
uL
L




        ( 2 5 )  
and the predicted sales of each new product in period t is, therefore, 

31 
 11
22ˆ *,
ˆ *.tt
ttNM L
NM L
          ( 2 6 )  
Using data on consumer a doption in a category with multiple pro ducts, one can use the non-linear least 
squares procedure, first proposed by Srinivasan an d Mason (1986), to estimate model parameters. We 
would like to note that this extended version of the BLDM  differs from the framework of Krishnan, 
Seetharaman and Vakratsas (2012) since, in th eir application, they used a first-stage BLDM  to model the 
category adoption, and a second-stage MNL to model product shares.  
In our case, to extend our dynamic pricing approach  to handle the multiple product case, we must 
solve for the Markov-Perfect Nash Equilibrium (MPNE)  of prices for the two competing products, by using 
a modified Pakes and McGuire (1994) algorithm that utilizes the dynamic optimization procedure 
developed in Cosguner, Chan and Seethara man (2018) (see Web Appendix G for details). 
In order to numerically illustrate the application of this extended dynamic pricing approach, we use 
the Color TV category. First, we fix M = 52274 (the estimated value from Table 3(a)). Second, we assume 
the existence of two competing products, both of whose prices are assumed to be identical to the category 
prices observed in our Color TV dataset. Third, we si mulate product-level adoptions data from the observed 
category-level adoptions in our  Color TV dataset by varying 1 and 2 such that the rela tive baseline market 
share of product 1, relative to product 2, takes f our possible values: 20 %, 40 %, 60 % and 80 %. This 
results in four synthetic product-level adoption datasets. Fourth, we  estimate the parameters of the extended 
BLDM -- p, q, β, 1, 2 – by applying the non-linear least squares procedure to each of the four synthetic 
product-level datasets. We report the results of our estim ation in Table 6. As expected, we recover identical 
estimates of p = 0.007, q = 0.885, β = - 0.005 under all 4 datasets (since these parameters require only 
category-level adoption outcomes, which are identical acr oss all 4 product-level datasets, for identification). 
Further, the estimates of 1 and 2 adjust in order to reflect the differe nces in relative baseline market shares 
across the two products in the four synthetic datasets. 
[Insert Table 6 here] 

32 
 Fifth, we implement the dynamic pricing appro ach explained in Web Appendix G on the four 
synthetic product-level datasets. The optimal price paths for the four pr oduct-level baseline market share 
situations are reported in Figure 7. The shapes of the optimal price paths are similar across the four 
situations, increasing at a diminishing rate over time a nd saturating in 10 periods or so, with the optimal 
price level increasing with relative baseline market sh are, as expected. For example, the saturation price 
varies from $300 (for a 20 % baseline share product) to $475 (for an 80 % baseline share product). 
[Insert Figure 7 here] 
Last, we implement the dynamic pricing approach for a situation when both products are owned by 
a common (monopolist) manufacturer. We assume consumer s’ intrinsic preferences to be identical across 
the two products, i.e., 1 = 2. The optimal price path yielded by this analysis is reported in Figure 8. For 
comparison, we also plot the optimal price path  for the case when the two products are owned by 
competitors (as in Figure 7). As expected, we find th at the optimal prices are always higher in the common 
ownership case. For example, the saturation price is  $660 in the common owne rship case versus $380 in 
the competing owners case. We also find that the tim e path of prices shows a smaller increase over time in 
the competing owners case as opposed  to the common ownership case. 
[Insert Figure 8 here] 
 
Conclusions 
The Bass Model (BM) has well served the manage rial purpose of new product sales forecasting in 
thousands of industrial applications over the p ast few decades. While pre-launch sales forecasting is 
important for new product planning, an  equally important responsibility for a product manager is the design 
of optimal marketing policies, especially launch price a nd advertising, for the new product. In this regard, 
the most successful sales forecasting model for new pr oducts, the Generalized Bass Model (GBM), is found 
to be severely lacking. This is because the GBM in corporates marketing mix effects within the BM using 
percentage changes in marketing variables from peri od to period, and not using their absolute levels 
themselves. Therefore, it is necessary for the manage r to make additional, untested, assumptions before 

33 
 rendering the GBM usable for optimal price policy pl anning. Even after making such untested assumptions, 
the GBM can be used to derive only the optimal pri ce path or advertising path for the new product after 
launch, conditional on an assumed launc h price, but not the launch price or advertising level itself. One 
solution to this problem is to estimate pre-launch c onsumer price sensitivity using a conjoint survey, and 
then derive the launch price based on this price sen sitivity. However, given the utility foundation of a 
conjoint model, such a launch price may not be beha viorally consistent with the post-launch price path 
yielded by the non-utility based GBM. 
In this paper, we provide a utility-based extension of the BM (unlike the GBM) that does not suffer 
from the prescriptive weakness of th e GBM. Unlike other utility-based di ffusion models in the literature, 
the provided utility-based diffusion model nests the BM  as a special case. Built on the foundations of 
consumer utility maximization, the diffusion model allows  the adoption rate for the new product to directly 
depend on the absolute levels of the marketing mix. Therefore, the diffusion mode l can yield, for example, 
normative prescriptions regarding both the introductory pr ice, as well as the optimal price path after launch, 
for the new product. We offer two versions of the utility-based diffusion model, namely the Bass-Gumbel 
Diffusion Model (BGDM)  and the Bass-Logit Diffusion Model (BLDM) , the latter of which has been 
previously used by Krishnan, Seetharaman and Vakratsas (2012). The BGDM version that is new to the 
literature nests the BM as a special case. Gi ven its utility foundation, one can estimate BGDM  / BLDM  in 
the absence of past sales data, using choice-based conjoint data instead. 
Using empirical data from 4 product categories, we  show that the two versions of the utility-based 
diffusion model handily outperform the GBM and BM in forecasting new product sales both in sample and 
out of sample, with the BLDM  outperforming the BGDM . On the basis of these findings, we propose that 
even if one’s purpose is to only forecast new produc t sales, and not optimize the new product’s marketing 
mix, the BGDM  / BLDM  are still to be preferred to the GBM. BGDM  / BLDM  also predict the peak time of 
adoptions more accurately than the GBM. By us ing a computationally convenient dynamic pricing 
approach, we explicitly compare the op timal pricing policy yielded by the BLDM  to that of the GBM and 
find that the optimal price path derived from GBM yiel ds 13.8% lower revenue than the price path derived 

34 
 from BLDM . We also derive the optimal pricing polic ies under a range of possible values of model 
parameters. Finally, we show how to  extend the dynamic pricing approach  to the competitive, multi-product 
context. 
Some important caveats are in order. First, us ing adoption data across many new products, it would 
be interesting to study the implications of varyi ng degrees of heterogeneity in price sensitivities across 
consumer segments on the implied opt imal price paths for the product. 9 Second, while estimating the 
utility-based diffusion model using historical sales da ta, we treat prices as exogenous. In reality, new 
product prices are chosen by product managers for endogenous reasons that are not observed by the 
researcher. One could use a control function approach  to correct for possible endogeneity of prices (if 
suitable instruments are available) by including the fitt ed residuals from an instrumental variable regression 
as an additional explanatory variable in the consume r’s utility function. Third, we treat consumers as 
myopic in their decision-making, i.e., they do not antici pate the trajectory of future prices. However, there 
is a literature in economics and marketing, inspir ed by Coase (1972), that has studied the pricing 
implications of forward-looking consumers for durab le goods sellers. For example, Besanko and Winston 
(1990) and Nair (2007) show that the maximum pri ce that a monopolist will charge over the dynamic price 
path would be lower, and subsequent prices would decline less steeply, when consumers are forward 
looking. It would be interesting to study the implicat ions of forward-looking consumers in our case to see 
whether the motivation to eventually  decrease price would be similarly mitigated for the seller. We leave 
this for future research. 
Our focus in this study is to provide a utility-based  extension of the BM which not only forecasts 
new product sales better than existing models such as  GBM, but also has excellent prescriptive properties 
for optimal price planning, and explicitly undertaki ng endogeneity correction is  not germane to this 
objective. The provided dynamic pricing algorithm will yield practical value to new product managers. As 
a fruitful avenue for future research, we propose the study of functional regression, first proposed by Sood, 
 
9 In our dataset, we estimated a two-segment model and found the optimal prices to slightly increase, while maintaining the same  
non-monotonic shape over time. We thank an anonymous re viewer for encouraging us  to study this issue. 

35 
 James and Tellis (2009), which exploits data acro ss multiple products and markets, as an improved 
estimation procedure for the provi ded utility-based diffusion model. 
References  
Bass, F. M. (1969). A New-Product Growth Model for Consumer Durables, Management Science, 15, 1, 
215-227. 
Bass, F. M., Bultez, A. V. (1982). A Note on Optimal Strategic Pricing of Technological Innovations, 
Marketing Science, 1, 4, 371-378. 
Bass, F. M., Jain, D. C., Krishnan, T. V. (2000). Modeling the Marketing Mix Influence in New Product 
Diffusion, Chapter 5, New Product Diffusion Models, Kluwer Academic Press, 99-122. 
Bass, F. M., Krishnan, T. V., Jain, D. C. (1994). Why the Bass Model Fits Without Decision Variables, 
Marketing Science, 13, 2, 203-223. 
Bayus, B. (1992). The Dynamic Pricing of Next Gene ration Consumer Durables, Marketing Science, 11, 
3, 251-265. 
Besanko, D., Winston, W. L. (1990). Optimal Price Skimming by a Monopolist Facing Rational 
Consumers, Management Sc ience, 36, 4, 555-567. 
Coase, R. H. (1972). Durability and Monopoly, The J ournal of Law and Economi cs, 15, 1, 143-149. 
Cosguner, K., Chan, T., Seetharaman, P. B. (2018). Dynamic Pricing in a Distribution Channel in the 
Presence of Switching Costs, Manageme nt Science, 64, 3, 1212-1229. 
Dockner, E., Jorgensen, S. (1988). Optimal Pricing Strategies for New Products in Dynamic Oligopolies, 
Marketing Science, 7, 4, 315-334. 
Fruchter, G. E., Van den Bulte, C. (2011). Why the Generalized Bass Model Leads to Odd Optimal 
Advertising Policies, International Journal of Research in Marketing, 28, 1, 218-230. 
Guadagni, P. M., Little, J. D. C. (1983). A Logit Model of Brand Choice Cali brated on Scanner Data, 
Marketing Science, 27, 1, 29-48. 
Gumbel, E. J. (1958). Statistics of Extremes, Co lumbia University Press, New York and London. 
Han, A., Hausman, J. (1990). Flexible Parametric Estimation of Duration and Competing Risk Models, 
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 5, 1, 1-28. 
Heckman, J. J., Singer, B. (1984). A Method for Minimizing the Impact of Distributional Assumptions in 
Econometric Models for Duration Data , Econometrica, 52, 2, 271-320. 
Jain, D., Rao, R. C. (1990). Effect of Price on the Demand for Durables: Modeling, Estimation and Findings, 
Journal of Business and Economic  Statistics, 8, 1, 163-170. 
 Jiang, Z., Bass, F. M., Bass, P. I. (2006). Vi rtual Bass Model and the Left-Hand Truncation Bias in 
Diffusion of Innovation Studies, International Jour nal of Research in Marketing, 23, 1, 93-106. 

36 
 Kalish, S. (1983). Monopolist Pricing with Dyna mic Demand, Marketing Science, 2, 2, 135-159. 
Kalish, S., Lilien, G. L. (1983). Optimal Price Subs idy Policy for Accelerating the Diffusion of Innovation, 
Marketing Science, 2, 4, 407-420. 
 Krishnan, T. V., Bass, F. M., Jain, D. C. (1999). Optimal Pricing Strategy fo r New Products, Management 
Science, 45, 2, 1650-1663. 
Krishnan, T. V., Jain, D. C. (2006). Optimal Dyna mic Advertising Policy for New Products, Management 
Science, 52, 12, 1957-1969. 
Krishnan, T. V., Seetharaman, P. B., Vakratsas, D. (2012). The Multiple Roles of Interpersonal 
Communication in New Product Growth, International J ournal of Research in Marketing, 29, 2, 292-
305. 
Louviere, J. J., Hensher, D. A., Swait, J. D. ( 2000). Stated Choice Methods: Analysis and Applications, 
Cambridge University Press. 
Luce, R. D. (1958). A Probabilistic Theory of Utility, Econometrica, 26, 2, 193-224. 
Melnikov, O. (2012). Demand for Diffe rentiated Durable Products: The Case of the US Computer Printer 
Market, Economic Inquiry, 51, 4, 1277-1298. 
Meyer, B. D. (1990). Unemployment Insurance and Unem ployment Spells, Econometrica, 58, 3, 757-782.  
Nair, H. (2007). Intertemporal Price Discrimination w ith Forward-Looking Consumers: Application to the 
US Market for Console Video Games, Quantitativ e Marketing and Economics,  5, 2, 239-292.  
Ofek, E. (2008). Forecasting the Adoption of a Ne w Product, Harvard Business School Case 9-505-062. 
Pakes, A., McGuire, P. (1994). Computing Markov-P erfect Nash Equilibria, RAND Journal of Economics, 
25, 4, 555-589. 
Peres, R., Muller, E., Mahajan, V. (2010). Inn ovation Diffusion and New Product Growth Models: A 
Critical Review and Research Directions, Internationa l Journal of Research in Marketing, 27, 2, 91-106. 
Seetharaman, P. B. (2004). The A dditive Risk Model for Purchase Timing,  Marketing Science, 23, 2, 234-
242. 
Song, I., Chintagunta, P. K. (2003). A Micromodel of New Product Adoption with Heterogeneous and 
Forward Looking Consumers: Application to the Di gital Camera Category, Quantitative Marketing and 
Economics, 1, 4, 371-407. 
Srinivasan, V., Mason, C. H. (1986). Nonlinear L east Squares Estimation of New Product Diffusion 
Models, Marketing Science, 5, 1, 169-178. 
Thompson, G. L., Teng, J. T. (1984). Optimal Pric ing and Advertising Policies for New Product Oligopoly 
Models, Marketing Science, 3, 2, 148-168. 
Van den Bulte, C., Lilien, G. L. (2007). Bias and Syst ematic Change in the Parameter Estimates of Macro-
Level Diffusion Models, Marketi ng Science, 16, 4, 338-353. 
 

37 
 TABLE 1: FIT COMPARISON OF DIFFUSION MODELS – FULL SAMPLE 
SSE    BGDM   BLDM  GBM  BM  T 
Color TV   457,051  457,387  402,514   996,421  10  
Air Conditioner   90,726  89,550   294,659  341,468  13 
Clothes Dryer   129,485  129,227   210,770  212,777  13 
Freezer    136,767  136,728   209,251  242,672  15 
T = Number of Observations 
Note: The best-fitting model for each product category is shown in bold. 
 
TABLE 2: PREDICTIONS COMPAR ISON – HOLDOUT VALIDATION  
SSE  Actual  BGDM   BLDM  GBM  BM  Period 
Color TV 5962  5506  5524   4705  4288  9 
  4631  4951   4977  3102  2527  10 
 
AC  1800  1688  1695   1244  1283  11 
  1580  1453  1471   862  947  12 
  1500  1466  1488   648  652  13 
 Dryer  1425  1041  1064   942  991  11 
  1260  841  878  631  739  12 
  1236  635  684  472  521  13 
 Freezer  1205  988  989  866  829  11 
  1045  988  988  754  724  12 
  1050  905  910  620  620  13 
Note: The best-fitting model for each product category / period combination is shown in bold. 
 
TABLE 3: PREDICTION COMPARISON: K-FOLD CROSS VALIDATION 
(Entries represent the % of times each model is the “best” across all folds) 
 Leave One Ou t Leave Two Ou t 
Models with Price BGDM BLDM GBM BGDM BLDM GBM 
Color TV 30% 30% 40% 24% 38% 38% 
Air Conditione r 46% 23% 31% 32% 37% 31% 
Clothes Drye r 54% 15% 31% 32% 40% 28% 
Freeze r 47% 13% 40% 36% 26% 38% 
 
TABLE 4 (a): PARAMETER ESTIMATES FOR THE FOUR DIFFUSION MODELS  
   Parameter BGDM   BLDM  GBM  BM 
Color TV  p  0.007  0.006  0.004  0.005 
   q  0.887  0.890  0.591  0.635    M  52,290  52,274  40,273  40,248    β  -0.003  -0.003  -5.026  na 
 
Air Conditioner  p  0.030  0.029  0.009  0.009 
   q  0.800  0.798  0.361  0.375    M  27,848  28,542  18,820  18,710    β  -0.008  -0.008  -0.812*  na 
 

38 
 Clothes Dryer  p  0.030  0.029  0.014  0.014 
   q  0.455  0.461  0.327  0.327 
   M  20,350  20,802  16,387  16,497 
   β  -0.006  -0.006  -0.302*  na 
 Freezer   p  0.058  0.057  0.020  0.025    q  0.435  0.439  0.143  0.148    M  20,932  21,437  25,578  22,266    β  -0.004  -0.004  1.301*  na 
Note: * denotes that the coefficient is not significant at the 0.05 level. 
 
TABLE 4 (b): MARKET POTENTIAL ES TIMATES USING TRAINING SAMPLE 
     B G D M    B L D M   G B M   B M  
Color TV    59,961  61,317  33,729  31,608 
Air Conditioner    25,720  26,845  13,467  13,660 
Clothes Dryer    12,683  13,183  11,532  11,844 
Freezer     18,971  19,414  16,961  15,774  
Note: The estimates in this table are genera ted using only the first 80 % of the observations  
 
TABLE 5: PREDICTED PEAK ADOPTION TIMES AND NUMBER OF ADOPTIONS 
    BGDM BLDM BM GBM Actual 
Color TV Peak Adoption Time 8 8 8 8 8 
Peak Number of Adoptions 6,139 6,140 6,442 6,218 5,982 
Adoption Lifetime 37 37 20 20 NA 
Air Conditioner Peak Adoption Time 8 8 10 10 8 
Peak Number of Adoptions 1,784 1,778 1,837 1,933 1,828 
Adoption Lifetime 48 48 27 27 NA 
Clothes Dryer Peak Adoption Time 8 8 10 10 8 
Peak Number of Adoptions 1,412 1,409 1,457 1,454 1,523 
Adoption Lifetime 45 47 28 28 NA 
Freezer Peak Adoption Time 14 14 11 9 13 
Peak Number of Adoptions 1,108 1,106 1,122 1,117 1,205 
Adoption Lifetime 46 50 47 49 NA 
 
TABLE 6: BLDM ESTIMATES WITH TWO ASYMMETRIC PRODUCTS 
Market Share of Product 1: 20% 40% 60% 80% 
p 0.007 0.007 0.007 0.007 
q 0.885 0.885 0.885 0.885 
M 52274 52274 52274 52274 
𝜆ଵ -0.413 0.277 0.682 0.972 
𝜆ଶ 0.972 0.682 0.277 -0.413 
B -0.005 -0.005 -0.005 -0.005 
Note: All estimates are significant at the 5 % level. M is  set to 52274 in the estimation for identification purpose. 
 
 

39 
  
 
FIGURE 1: ESTIMATED PROBABILITY DENSITIES OF ADOPTION TIMES 
 
 
 
 0 1 02 03 04 00.00 0.05 0.10 0.15Figure 1A: Color TV
Timefd(t)BM
GBM
BGDM
BLDM
01 0 2 0 3 0 4 00.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10Figure 1B: Air Conditioner
Timefd(t)BM
GBM
BGDM
BLDM
0 2 04 06 08 00.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08Figure 1C: Clothes Dryers
Timefd(t)BM
GBM
BGDM
BLDM
0 2 04 06 08 00.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08Figure 1D: Freezers
Timefd(t)BM
GBM
BGDM
BLDM

40 
 FIGURE 2: OPTIMAL DYNAMIC PRICE PATHS YIELDED BY THE BLDM 
 
  
  
 
  


41 
 FIGURE 3: OPTIMAL DYNAMIC PRICE PATH OF BLDM VERSUS GBM: COLOR TV 
 
 
 
FIGURE 4: OPTIMAL DYNAMIC PRICING POLICY IMPLIED BY THE BLDM 
 
 
 


42 
 FIGURE 5: OPTIMAL INTRODUCTORY PRICE AT VARIOUS LEVELS OF MARKET PRICE 
SENSITIVITY ( β) 
 
 
FIGURE 6: OPTIMAL INTRODUCTORY PRICE AT VARIOUS LEVELS OF FIRM 
DISCOUNT FACTOR ( ρ) 
 
 0.002 0.004 0.006 0.008 0.010500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
Price CoefficientIntroductory Price
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0200 300 400 500
Discount FactorIntroductory Price

43 
 FIGURE 7: OPTIMAL DYNAMIC PRICE PATHS OF BLDM –  
TWO COMPETING PRODUCTS 
 
 
 
FIGURE 8: OPTIMAL DYNAMIC PRICE PATH OF BLDM – 
MONOPOLIST SELLING TWO PRODUCTS 
 


1 
 WEB APPENDICES 
 
Web Appendix A: Holdout Validation 
 
We construct the holdout sample in 4 different ways: (i) final 10 % of observations, (ii) final 20 % of 
observations (reported in the main manuscript), (iii) final 30 % of observations, (iv) final 40 % of 
observations. We do not use cases (iii) and (iv) for Colo r TV because of the relative paucity of observations 
in that category. Furthermore, we do not use additional cases, such as having more than 40 % of 
observations in the holdout sample since the predic tions become unreliable, as is well known in the 
diffusion modeling literature, with such small training samples, especially when the data span a period 
sufficiently prior to the projected peak times of adop tion. In practice, product analogs play an important 
role in such early stages of the a doption cycle, where the implied adopti on rates of the analogs are combined 
with limited historical data on the product, usi ng a Bayesian updating scheme (see Lenk and Rao 1990), in 
order to make reliable forecasts. Since we are only usi ng historical data in our study and ignoring product 
analogs, we study only the 4 cases listed above. In the fo llowing table, we present the results of holdout 
predictions in all 4 cases for each holdout observation.  
Scenario (i) – 90% Training Sample 
Actual BGDM BLDM GBM BM Periods 
Color TV 4631 5776 5774 4539 4119 10 
AC 1500 1614 1619 1279 1221 13 
Dryer 1236 1176 1180 951 977 13 
Freezer 1050 1032 1037 1071 941 15 
 
Scenario (ii) – 80% Training Sample 
 Actual BGDM BLDM GBM BM Periods 
Color TV 5962 5506 5524 4705 4288 9 
4631 4951 4977 3102 2527 10 
AC 1800 1688 1695 1244 1283 11 
1580 1453 1471 862 947 12 
1500 1466 1488 648 652 13 
Dryer 1425 1041 1064 942 991 11 
1260 841 878 631 739 12 
1236 635 684 472 521 13 
Freezer 1205 988 989 866 829 13 
1045 988 988 754 724 14 
1050 905 910 704 620 15 
 
Scenario (iii) – 70% Training Sample 

2 
  Actual BGDM BLDM GBM BM Periods 
AC 1673 1955 1953 1681 1332 10 
1800 2031 2030 1252 970 11 
1580 1796 1803 869 643 12 
1500 1967 1973 655 401 13 
Dryer 1240 1289 1327 928 1211 10 
1425 1127 1207 636 966 11 
1260 991 1141 321 713 12 
1236 805 992 247 497 13 
Freezer 925 903 905 834 821 11 
1101 824 827 702 684 12 
1205 727 734 587 552 13 
1045 644 654 465 434 14 
1050 540 555 384 335 15 
 
Scenario (iv) – 60% Training Sample 
 Actual Gumbel Logi t GBM Bass Periods 
AC 1586 1441 1448 1341 1784 9 
1673 1865 1873 1449 1596 10 
1800 1925 1938 963 1265 11 
1580 1688 1709 608 909 12 
1500 1841 1867 450 609 13 
Dryer 1294 1835 1839 1762 1772 9 
1240 1986 2004 1528 1900 10 
1425 2000 2044 1321 1904 11 
1260 1792 1876 859 1782 12 
1236 1531 1653 756 1565 13 
Freezer 975 1002 1005 914 911 10 
925 936 941 787 772 11 
1101 870 878 649 629 12 
1205 782 795 532 497 13 
1045 709 725 414 383 14 
1050 605 626 336 290 15 
 
We summarize the key take-aways  of the above table below: 
1. In case (i), there are 4 holdout observations in total. BLDM  wins in 2 cases (50%), BGDM  in 1 case 
(25%), and GBM in 1 case (25%). Overall, theref ore, our utility-based mode ls win in 3 out of 4 
cases (75%). 
2. In case (ii), there are 11 holdout observations in total. BLDM  wins in 10 cases (91%), BGDM  in 1 
case (9%). Overall, therefore, our utility-based models win in 11 out of 11 cases (100%). 

3 
 3. In case (iii), there are 13 holdout observations in total. BLDM  wins in 9 cases (69%), BGDM  in 3 
cases (23%), and GBM in 1 case (8%). Overall, th erefore, our utility-based models win in 12 out 
of 13 cases (92%). 
4. In case (iv), there are 16 holdout observations in total. BLDM  wins in 5 cases (31%), BGDM  in 7 
cases (44%), and GBM in 4 cases (25%). Overall, th erefore, our utility-based models win in 12 out 
of 16 cases (75%). 
 
We also present a convenient qualitative summ ary of these analyses in the table below.  
 
Training Sample Size BGDM BLDM GBM BM 
60% 44% 31% 25.0% 0.0% 
70% 23% 69% 8% 0.0% 
80% 9% 91% 0.0% 0.0% 90% 25% 50% 25% 0.0% 
 
These analyses lend additional suppor t to the predictive ability of BGDM  / BLDM . 
 
Web Appendix B.1: Prior Models of New Pro duct Adoption with Marketing Mix Variables 
 
We compare the empirical performance of the BLDM  against that of each of several previously proposed 
diffusion models which incorporate the effects of ma rketing variables. These models are listed below. 
 Robinson and Lakhani (1975) 
 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠
௧ൌሺ 𝑀െൣ ∑𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௞௧ିଵ
௞ୀଵ ൧ሻሺ𝑝൅𝑞  ൣ∑𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௞௧ିଵ
௞ୀଵ ൧ሻ𝑒ିఉ ௉௥௜௖௘೟ 
 
Horsky and Simon (1983) 
 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௧ൌሺ 𝑀െൣ ∑𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௞௧ିଵ
௞ୀଵ ൧ሻሺ𝛼 ൅𝛽 lnሺ 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒௧ሻ൅𝑞 ൣ∑𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௞௧ିଵ
௞ୀଵ ൧ሻ 
 
Simon and Sebastian (1987) 
 Specification A: 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௧ൌሺ 𝑀െൣ ∑𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௞௧ିଵ
௞ୀଵ ൧ሻሺ𝑝൅𝑝  𝑓ሺ 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒௧ሻ 𝑞 ൣ∑𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௞௧ିଵ
௞ୀଵ ൧ሻ 
 Specification B: 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௧ൌ൫ 𝑀െൣ ∑𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௞௧ିଵ
௞ୀଵ ൧൯൫𝑝൅ሼ𝑞൅𝑞  𝑓ሺ 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒௧ሻሽൣ∑𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௞௧ିଵ
௞ୀଵ ൧൯ 
where 𝑓ሺ 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒௧ሻ is either lnሺ 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒௧ሻ or ∑ lnሺ 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒௞ሻ௧
௞ୀଵ . We call these two cases A1 (B1) and A2 
(B2), respectively. 
 

4 
 Jain and Rao (1990) 
 Specification A: 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௧ൌሺ 𝑀  𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒௧ିఉെൣ∑𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௞௧ିଵ
௞ୀଵ ൧ሻிሺ௧ሻିிሺ௧ିଵሻ
ଵିிሺ௧ିଵሻ 
 Specification B: 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௧ൌሺ 𝑀െൣ ∑𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௞௧ିଵ
௞ୀଵ ൧ሻሺ𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒௧ିఉሻிሺ௧ሻିிሺ௧ିଵሻ
ଵିிሺ௧ିଵሻ 
where 𝐹ሺ𝑡ሻൌሺ1െ𝑒ିሺ௣ା௤ሻ௧ሻ
ሺ1൅ሺ𝑞𝑝ൗሻ𝑒ିሺ௣ା௤ሻ௧ሻ൘  
 
In the following table, we report the minimized crite rion function (sum of square d errors) associated with 
each model estimated on our four datasets.  
Model    Color TV  AC  Dryer  Freezer 
 BLDM     457,387   89,550   129,227  136,728  
Robinson and Lakhani (1975)  2,052,148  535,245  249,838  223,199 Horsky and Simon (1983)  2,184,305  248,158  266,154  251,550 
Simon and Sebastian (1987) – A1 2,742,153  542,835  269,617  257,846 
Simon and Sebastian (1987) – A2 1,744,018  310,979  170,260  375,005 Simon and Sebastian (1987) – B1 2,702,510  530,939  278,377  269,620 Simon and Sebastian (1987) – B2 5,641,234  924,557  523,261  409,141 Jain and Rao (1990) – A   573,609   226,088  130,852  135,236 
Jain and Rao (1990) – B   427,858    144,657  128,350   143,110 
_____________________________________________________________________________________  Except the Jain and Rao (1990) models, the rema ining models are vastly outperformed by the BLDM . 
However, the Jain and Rao (1990) – B model outpe rforms our model in the Color TV category, and 
narrowly beats it in the dryer category. While we ac knowledge the good predictive performance of the Jain 
and Rao (1990) – B model, we must note that it cannot be used for price optimization since it implies 
positive infinity as the profit-maximizing price . On the other hand, our model can be used for price 
optimization, which is the focus of our research.  
We report the parameter estimates yielded by the Jain and Rao (1990) models below. 
 
   Parameter BLDM   Jain & Rao - A  Jain & Rao - B 
Color TV  p  0.006   0.006   0.004 
   q  0.890   0.668   0.887    M  52,720   unstable *  53,410    β  -0.0025   -3.05 *   -0.178 
 
Air Conditioner  p  0.029   0.014   0.013 
   q  0.803   0.381   0.768    M  28,560   unstable *  46,860    β  -0.008   -1.095 *  -0.444 

5 
  
Clothes Dryer  p  0.029   0.014   0.026 
   q  0.461   0.377   0.498 
   M  20,800   unstable *  25,610    β  -0.006   -0.826 *  -0.296 * 
 Freezer   p  0.057   0.024   0.098    q  0.439   0.310   0.432 
   M  21,440   unstable *  44,060 
   β  -0.004   -0.802   -0.440 
Note: * denotes that the coefficient is  not significant at the 0.05 level. 
 
Jain and Rao (1990) – A does not yield stable or statisti cally significant estimates of market potential (M). 
The estimates of M are generally implausibly large,  with correspondingly large standard errors (the BLDM  
does not suffer from this concern). The price coeffi cients, while negatively signed, are statistically 
insignificant in 3 out of the 4 categories (while the BLDM  recovers statistically significant price coefficients 
in all categories). On the other hand, Jain and Rao (1990) – B yields more sens ible parameter estimates 
(although the estimates of M are overstated by a factor of 2, compared to our model, in two categories). 
That said, as we have noted earlier, Jain and Rao (1990) - B is limited from the price optimization 
perspective since it implies positive infin ity for the level of optimal prices. 
 
Web Appendix B.2: Proportional Hazard Models (PHM) of New Product Adoption 
 This online appendix compares the BLDM 's empirical performance versus  various proportional hazard 
models (PHM) with marketing variables. Specifically, we  test five different specifications of the PHM (each 
using a different baseline hazard function) as listed below. 
 
Exponential Hazard: ℎሺ𝑡ሻൌ𝛾  
 Prሺ𝑃𝑢𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒 ሻൌ1െe
ି௘ഁ ುೝ೔೎೐∗ఊ  
 
Erlang-2 Hazard: ℎሺ𝑡ሻൌሺ 𝛾ଶ𝑡ሻ/ሺ1൅𝛾𝑡ሻ   
 Prሺ𝑃𝑢𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒 ሻൌ1െeି௘ഁ ುೝ೔೎೐∗ሼఊା୪୬ሾଵା ሺ௧ିଵሻఊሿି୪୬ሾଵା௧ఊሿሽ   
 
Weibull  Hazard : ℎሺ𝑡ሻൌ𝛾 𝛼 ሺ𝛾𝑡ሻఈିଵ  
 Prሺ𝑃𝑢𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒 ሻൌ1െeି௘ഁ ುೝ೔೎೐∗ሼሾ୲ఊሿഀିሾሺ୲ିଵሻఊሿഀሽ 
 
Log-logistic Hazard:  ℎሺ𝑡ሻൌሾ 𝛾  𝛼 ሺ𝛾𝑡ሻఈିଵሿ/ሾ1൅ሺ𝛾𝑡ሻఈሿ 

6 
  Prሺ𝑃𝑢𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒 ሻൌ1െeି௘ഁ ುೝ೔೎೐∗ሼ୪୬ሾଵାሺ௧ఊሻഀሿି୪୬ሾଵାሺሾ௧ିଵሿఊሻഀሿሽ 
 
Expo-power Hazard:  ℎሺ𝑡ሻൌ𝛾 𝛼𝑡ఈିଵ𝑒ఏ௧ഀ 
 Prሺ𝑃𝑢𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒 ሻൌ1െeି௘ഁ ುೝ೔೎೐∗ቄം
ഇቂ௘ഇ೟ഀି௘ഇሺ೟షభሻഀቃቅ 
 
In the following table, we report the minimized crite rion function (sum of square d errors) associated with 
five different specifications of the PHM (each using a different baseline hazard function) estimated on our 
four datasets.  
Model    Color TV  AC  Dryer  Freezer 
 BLDM    457,387    89,550   129,227  136,728  
PHM – Exponential  4,880,824  702,022  1,180,811 623,342 
PHM – Erlang2   4,880,824  573,859  293,558  221,601 
PHM – Weibull   575,972   150,120  124,395   185,567 
PHM – Log Logistic  618,587   98,285  155,528  185,530 PHM – Expo Power  653,067   170,205  138,736  195,639 _______________________________________________________________________________  The BLDM  outperforms all five specifications of the PHM in 3 out of 4 categories. In the dryer category, 
the Weibull specification of the PHM outperforms our  utility-based model. We report the parameter 
estimates yielded by PHM - Weibull in the dryer category below.  
Parameter  BLDM    PHM - Weibull 
p   0.029    na 
q   0.461    na 
δ   na    0.200 * 
α   n a     2 . 1 9 7  
M   20,800    16,350 β   -0.006    -0.008 *  
Note: * denotes that the coefficient is  not significant at the 0.05 level. 
 
We see that while the price coefficient under PHM – Weibull is negatively signed, as expected; however, 
it is not statistically significant. That said, we still  derive the optimal price path implied by the PHM – 
Weibull by using the estimated size of the price coefficient and report the plot below. The optimal prices 
implied by the PHM – Weibull appear to be unrealistically low and almost constant over time . The optimal 
prices implied by our utility-based model, on the other hand, are much closer to the actual prices observed 
in the data.  

7 
  
Web Appendix C.1: Covid-19 Diffusion 
 
To illustrate the empirical performance of BGDM  / BLDM  on recent data, we first focus on an 
epidemiological application. It is useful to note he re that marketing diffusion models were originally 
inspired by mathematical models of disease spread th at were developed in epidemiology. Specifically, we 
study the effect of social distancing (covariate) on th e spread of COVID-19 (disease diffusion) in Missouri. 
 We located two data sources to enable the above. The first contains daily new positive cases in each of 444 
school districts in Missouri and was obtained from Missouri Hospital Association. The second contains 
social distancing measures, collected using GPS loca tion data from a panel of cellphone users, and was 
obtained from SafeGraph ( http://www.safegraph.com/ covid-19-data-consortium ). We use three time-
varying metrics of social distancing: (1) percentage of  residents staying home, (2) percentage of residents 
working full-time at their workplace, (3) percentage of residents working part-time at their workplace. 
These three metrics serve as covariates in our epidemiol ogical application (similar to price in our marketing 
applications).  We aggregate daily cases, as well as the covariates, to the weekly level and obtain 18 usable weekly 
observations. These observations represent the 18-week pe riod from July 1, 2020 to  October 31, 2020. We 
have a total of 444 datasets representing the 444 school districts. We estimate four diffusion models --BM, 
GBM, BGDM, and BLDM -- in each of the 444 dataset s. We find that the utility-based models (either 


8 
 BGDM or BLDM) yield the best fit of the observed di ffusion of Covid-19 in 75.45 % of the datasets, while 
the GBM outperforms our utility-based m odels in 24.55 % of the datasets.  Social distancing measures are 
observed to significantly influence the spread of disease in expected ways (i.e., more social distancing is 
associated with slower disease spread). De tailed results are available upon request. 
 This further vindicates the predictive performance of BGDM  / BLDM , albeit in the context of epidemiology. 
If one were a public policy planner, one could treat th e social distance metrics as variables that can be 
“optimized” (to arrest the fast spread of disease in th e school district) by taking in to account monetary and 
human resource constraints faced by the school district. In principle, our dynamic pricing algorithm can be used to handle this dynamic optimization proble m with a suitably specified dynamic objective. 
 
Web Appendix C.2: Compact SUV Adoption in India 
 To illustrate the empirical performance of BGDM / BLDM  on recent data, we focus on a new product 
adoption application. We obtained quarterly data on  consumer adoption of compact SUVs in the Indian 
market starting from Q2 of 2010 until Q1 of 2015 (i.e., 20 quarters) from Otto Edge Services LLP, a 
marketing research company in India. In our data, we observe quarterly sales, as well as quarterly print 
advertising expenditures, and quarterl y TV advertising expenditures, for all brands of compact SUVs in the 
Indian market. We aggregated the data across all brands to create a category-level dataset. We then 
estimated BM, GBM, BGDM  and BLDM  on the category-level data. In terms of minimized sum of squared 
errors, the fit results are as shown below: 
 
BM:  188.8 million 
GBM:  165.4 million BGDM: 162.3 million BLDM:  157.4 million  Again, BGDM / BLDM  outperformed the GBM, with BLDM  being most preferred. We explicitly estimate 
a version of BLDM  to see whether print and TV advertisi ng have non-linear effects on SUV sales (using 
quadratic terms in the utility func tion). Accommodating such non-linear effects of advertising is not 
straightforward in the GBM. We uncover non-linear advertising effects for both types of advertising. 
Detailed results are available upon request. 
 
Web Appendix D: Sample R Code for the I nnovator Firm’s Dynamic Price Optimization 
 
# Setting the values of p, q, M, and B  p=0.01 

9 
 q=0.60 
M=50000 
B=-0.005 
 # Setting the number of periods to forward simulate (NT)  NT=40  
# Creating the storage matrix for prices 
 prices=matrix(0,NT,1)  # Setting the initial values for the pricin g policy function pa rameters (theta) 
 
pars=c(400,0,0,0,0,0)  # Making the cost assumption, intercept and slope are zero for the revenue optimization 
 
c0=0 
c1=0  # Creating the lifetime revenue function  revenue=function(pars){ 
     
  A=matrix(pars)        Ntlogit=matrix(0,NT,1)   price=matrix(0,NT,1) 
  cost=matrix(0,NT,1) 
       prt=matrix(0,NT,1)   prtm=matrix(0,NT,1)        t=1 
  tl=t-1 
       Ft=((1-exp(-(p+q)*t))/(1+(q/p)*exp(-(p+q)*t)))   Ftm1=((1-exp(-(p+q)*tl))/(1+(q/p)*exp(-(p+q)*tl)))    
  # We recommend to start with a first-order polic y function of states. Once the estimates from the first-
order policy approximation are obtained, the research er can modify the policy function by adding the 
quadratic and interaction terms.      X=cbind(1,t,t^2,M,M^2,t*M)    
  # Calculating the first period price, sales and cost. 
       price[t]=X%*%A        vt=log(log((1-Ftm1)/(1-Ft)))+B*price[t] 

10 
      
  prt[1,]=exp(vt)/(1+exp(vt)) 
  prtm[1,]=1-prt[1,] 
       Ntlogit[1]=M*prt[1]        cost[t]=c0+c1*0    
  # Calculating the prices, sales and costs for periods 2 to NT. 
     t=2   while(t<=NT){        
    tl=t-1 
           Ft=((1-exp(-(p+q)*t))/(1+(q/p)*exp(-(p+q)*t)))     Ftm1=((1-exp(-(p+q)*tl))/(1+(q/p)*exp(-(p+q)*tl)))        
    if(Ft<1){ 
               R=(M-sum(Ntlogit[1:(t-1)]))                X=cbind(1,t,t^2,R,R^2,t*R)          
      price[t]=X%*%A 
             vt=log(log((1-Ftm1)/(1-Ft)))+B*price[t]                prt[t,]=exp(vt)/(1+exp(vt)) 
      prtm[t,]=1-prt[t,] 
               Ntlogit[t]=M*prod(prtm[1:(t-1)])*prt[t]                cost[t]=c0+c1*sum(Ntlogit[1:(t-1)])     } 
     
    # If the CDF of the adoption time reaches to 1, set the sales to zero. 
           if(Ft==1){       Ntlogit[t]=0 
    } 
           t=t+1   }      # Creating the discount vector 
     
  discount=matrix(1,NT,1)        i=1   while(i<=NT){ 

11 
        
    discount[i,]=0.95^(i-1) 
       
    i=i+1   }      # Returning the negative of lifetime revenue    
  return(-sum((price-cost)*Ntlogit*discount)) 
}  # Optimizing the lifetime revenue to find the parameters of the policy function. 
 
pars=optim(pars,revenue,method="Nel der-Mead",control=list(maxit=500000)) 
pars=pars$par    # Given the estimated policy functi on parameters, forward simulating prices, sales and costs from period 1 
to NT. 
 
A=matrix(pars)    Ntlogit=matrix(0,NT,1) price=matrix(0,NT,1) cost=matrix(0,NT,1) 
   
prt=matrix(0,NT,1) prtm=matrix(0,NT,1)    t=1 
tl=t-1 
   Ft=((1-exp(-(p+q)*t))/(1+(q/p)*exp(-(p+q)*t))) Ftm1=((1-exp(-(p+q)*tl))/ (1+(q/p)*exp(-(p+q)*tl))) 
   R=(M-sum(Ntlogit[1:(t-1)])) 
   
X=cbind(1,t,t^2,M,M^2,t*M)    price[t]=X%*%A    
vt=log(log((1-Ftm1)/(1-Ft)))+B*price[t] 
   prt[1,]=exp(vt)/(1+exp(vt)) prtm[1,]=1-prt[1,]    Ntlogit[1]=M*prt[1] 
   
cost[t]=c0+c1*0    t=2 while(t<=NT){ 

12 
      
  tl=t-1 
     
  Ft=((1-exp(-(p+q)*t))/(1+(q/p)*exp(-(p+q)*t)))   Ftm1=((1-exp(-(p+q)*tl))/(1+(q/p)*exp(-(p+q)*tl)))      if(Ft<1){        
  R=(M-sum(Ntlogit[1:(t-1)])) 
         X=cbind(1,t,t^2,R,R^2,t*R)          price[t]=X%*%A 
       
  vt=log(log((1-Ftm1)/(1-Ft)))+B*price[t]          prt[t,]=exp(vt)/(1+exp(vt))   prtm[t,]=1-prt[t,] 
     
  Ntlogit[t]=M*prod(prtm[1:(t-1)])*prt[t]          cost[t]=c0+c1*sum(Ntlogit[1:(t-1)]) }      
  if(Ft==1){ 
    Ntlogit[t]=0   }        t=t+1 
} 
 # Plotting the optimal price path  ranges=range(price) plot(price,ylim=ranges,type='l',lty=2,col='blue',lw d=2,ylab="Price",xlab="Tim e",main="Optimal Price 
Path") 
  
Web Appendix E: Sensitivity Analysis of Optimal Price Paths  
 
Using the estimated standard errors of the estim ated model parameters, we undertake a sensitivity 
analysis. Below we report the optimal price paths b ased on the estimated 95 % confidence intervals for p 
and q. We summarize two take-aways of these graphs : (1) The 95% prediction bands are quite “tight” for 
p, which means that the impact of uncertainty in the estimated value of  p on optimal prices is minimal, (2) 
The 95% prediction band is wider for q, but it appe ars substantively wider than necessary because of our 
scaling of the y-axis. For example, the maximum price over the dynamic price path varies from $770 (lower bound) versus $880 (upper bound) in the color TV cat egory, a difference of $110 because of parameter 

13 
 uncertainty (large but not worrisomely large). In pr actice, the risk aversion and objective functions of 
managers will determine how they make use of this un certainty in pricing prescriptions and its effect on 
the category profit. 
 
FIGURE E1: SENSITIVITY ANALYSES OF OPTIMAL PRICE PATHS WRT p   
  
   
  
 
  


14 
 FIGURE E2: SENSITIVITY ANALYSES OF OPTIMAL PRICE PATHS WRT q   
  
   
   
 
Web Appendix F: The Effect of Declining Costs on Optimal Price Paths 
 
To calculate the dynamic price path s, rather than making any assumpti ons about the unobserved production 
costs, we allow the firm to maximize its product's lifetime revenue at the given values of the category's 
diffusion parameters (i.e., p and q). Our simulation studies show that optimal prices follow a non-monotonic 
path over time (i.e., initially increasing but th en decreasing) across all combinations of p and q. On the other 
hand, if profit maximization is the firm's objective an d the firm has a steep experiential learning curve for 


15 
 the marginal cost of production for its new product, it might be possible to obtain optimal prices that fall 
over time. To investigate this possibility, we cond uct additional simulation studies, where we assume 
declining costs over time or profit margin (m) increases over time as follows: m = 1 – [0.9 / (t0.1)]. Under 
this assumption, we obtain the following dynamic pr ice paths for the new product. As conjectured, the 
optimal prices decrease overtime for all possible values of p and q. 
 
 
 
Web Appendix G: Numerical Optimization Algorithm for the Dynamic Pricing Game 
 
The pricing objective of the innovator firm j=1, 2 selling the new product j=1,2 is shown below. 
ሼPrice୨ଵ,Price୨ଶ,...,, P r i c e ୨୘ሽൌ argmax∑ρ୲ିଵ∗Price୨୲୘
୲ୀଵ ∗N୨୲  
where 𝜌 is the time discount factor, 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒௝௧ is the price of product j at time t, and 𝑁௝௧ is the expected sales 
of product j at time t. In this setting, each firm’s pricing decision at a period affects not only its and its 
competitor’s revenue in that period bu t also the revenue stream of both fi rms in the future (through changing 
the remaining market potential for new products and the ra te at which consumers a dopt the products in the 
future). The relevant state variables ( Z) for the innovator firms are, therefore, time and the remaining market 
potential, i.e., 𝑍௧ൌሼ 𝑡 ,𝑅௧ሽ, where 𝑅௧ൌ𝑀െ∑∑ 𝑁௝௞௧ିଵ
௞ୀଵଶ
௝ୀଵ . To find the optimal pricing policy functions 
of each firm, we adopt a modified Pakes and Mc Guire (1994) algorithm that utilizes the dynamic 


16 
 optimization procedure developed in Cosguner, Chan and Seetharaman (2018). First, we parameterize firm 
j’s temporal pricing policy as a flexible function of the state variables, Z, as shown below. 
Price୨ൌPrıce෣ሺZ|θ୨ሻ, 
where 𝑃𝑟𝚤𝑐𝑒ଵ෣ሺ.ሻ and 𝑃𝑟𝚤𝑐𝑒ଶ෣ሺ.ሻ denote a flexible parametric approxima tion of the pricing policy of firm 1 
and 2, respectively, and 𝜃ଵ and 𝜃ଶ are vectors of parameters to be estimated. To find the true 𝜃ଵ (𝜃ଶሻ for a 
given set of diffusion parameters  and the discount factor, i.e., 𝑝,𝑞,𝑀,𝛽,𝜆ଵ,𝜆ଶ,a n d  𝜌, we numerically 
search for 𝜃ଵ (𝜃ଶሻ that i) maximizes firm 1’s (2’s) lifetime product revenue, and ii) is the best response to 
firm 2’s (1’s) dynamic pricing policy. The algorithm is as follows. 
1. Start with initial pricing vectors, 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵ଴ൌ ሼ𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵଵ଴,𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵଶ଴,…,𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵ்଴ሽ and 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶ଴ൌ
ሼ𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଵ଴,𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଶ଴,…,𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶ்଴ሽ. 
1.1.  Given 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶ଴, get 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵଵ by using the subroutine 1. 
1.2.  Given 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵଵ, get 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଵ by using the subroutine 2. 
1.3.  Repeat 1.1-1.2 until 1Price Price 0nn  , where 1
2PricePrice [ ],
Pricen
n
n . 
1.4.  Set *Price Pricen  
Subroutine 1: Finding Firm 1’s Dynamic Best Response 
The objective of this subroutine is to find the dynamic best response of firm 1 (i.e., 𝜃ଵ) given a policy 
function of firm 2 (i.e, 𝜃ଶ). Accordingly, 𝜃ଵ can be estimated via using a standard optimization routine by 
maximizing the lifetime revenue of firm 1 that can be calculated by using the forward simulation algorithm 
below. 
 To forward simulate the revenue of  firm 1 for each candidate value of 𝜃ଵ: 
i. Start with the first period, i.e., 𝑍ଵൌሼ𝑡ൌ 1,𝑅ଵൌ𝑀ሽ. Given 𝑍ଵ, calculate 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵଵൌ
𝑃𝑟𝚤𝑐𝑒ଵ෣ሺ𝑍ଵ|𝜃ଵሻ and 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଵൌ𝑃 𝑟 𝚤 𝑐 𝑒 ଶ෣ሺ𝑍ଵ|𝜃ଶሻ. Given 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵଵ,𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଵ and 𝑍ଵ, calculate 
𝑁ଵଵሺ𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵଵ,𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଵ,𝑍ଵሻ and 𝑁ଶଵሺ𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ଵଵ,𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଵ,𝑍ଵሻ  using equation (26). 
ii. Given 𝑍ଶൌሼ𝑡ൌ 2,𝑅ଶൌ𝑀െ𝑁 ଵଵെ𝑁ଶଵሽ, calculate 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵଶൌ𝑃 𝑟 𝚤 𝑐 𝑒 ଵ෣ሺ𝑍ଶ|𝜃ଵሻ and 
𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଶൌ𝑃 𝑟 𝚤 𝑐 𝑒 ଶ෣ሺ𝑍ଶ|𝜃ଶሻ. Given 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵଶ,𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଶ and 𝑍ଶ, calculate 
𝑁ଵଶሺ𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵଶ,𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଶ,𝑍ଶሻ and 𝑁ଶଶሺ𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ଵଶ,𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଶ,𝑍ଶሻ  using equation (26). 
iii. Repeat (ii) until an iteration T such that 𝑅்ൌ𝑀െ∑∑ 𝑁௝௞்ିଵ
௞ୀଵଶ
௝ୀଵ ൎ0.  
iv. Calculate the discounted sum of revenues for firm 1, i.e., ∑𝜌௧ିଵ்
௧ୀଵ∗𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ଵ௧∗𝑁ଵ௧. That 
will be the lifetime revenue for the candidate value of 𝜃ଵ. 
Subroutine 2: Finding Firm 2’s Dynamic Best Response 

17 
 The objective of this subroutine is to find the dynamic best response of firm 2 (i.e., 𝜃ଶ) given a policy 
function of firm 1 (i.e, 𝜃ଵ). Accordingly, 𝜃ଶ can be estimated via using a standard optimization routine by 
maximizing the lifetime revenue of firm 2 that can be calculated by using the forward simulation algorithm 
below. 
 To forward simulate the revenue of  firm 2 for each candidate value of 𝜃ଶ: 
i. Start with the first period, i.e., 𝑍ଵൌሼ𝑡ൌ 1,𝑅ଵൌ𝑀ሽ. Given 𝑍ଵ, calculate 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵଵൌ
𝑃𝑟𝚤𝑐𝑒ଵ෣ሺ𝑍ଵ|𝜃ଵሻ and 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଵൌ𝑃 𝑟 𝚤 𝑐 𝑒 ଶ෣ሺ𝑍ଵ|𝜃ଶሻ. Given 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵଵ,𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଵ and 𝑍ଵ, calculate 
𝑁ଵଵሺ𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵଵ,𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଵ,𝑍ଵሻ and 𝑁ଶଵሺ𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ଵଵ,𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଵ,𝑍ଵሻ  using equation (26). 
ii. Given 𝑍ଶൌሼ𝑡ൌ 2,𝑅ଶൌ𝑀െ𝑁 ଵଵെ𝑁ଶଵሽ, calculate 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵଶൌ𝑃 𝑟 𝚤 𝑐 𝑒 ଵ෣ሺ𝑍ଶ|𝜃ଵሻ and 
𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଶൌ𝑃 𝑟 𝚤 𝑐 𝑒 ଶ෣ሺ𝑍ଶ|𝜃ଶሻ. Given 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵଶ,𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଶ and 𝑍ଶ, calculate 
𝑁ଵଶሺ𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଵଶ,𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଶ,𝑍ଶሻ and 𝑁ଶଶሺ𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ଵଶ,𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒ଶଶ,𝑍ଶሻ  using equation (26). 
iii. Repeat (ii) until an iteration T such that 𝑅்ൌ𝑀െ∑∑ 𝑁௝௞்ିଵ
௞ୀଵଶ
௝ୀଵ ൎ0.  
iv. Calculate the discounted sum of revenues for firm 2, i.e., ∑𝜌௧ିଵ்
௧ୀଵ∗𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ଶ௧∗𝑁ଶ௧. That 
will be the lifetime revenue for the candidate value of 𝜃ଶ. 
 
   
 
   
View publication statsView publication stats

