 
 
1 
 Dynamically Managing a Profitable Email Marketing Program 
 
Xi (Alan) Zhang 
V Kumar 
Koray Cosguner 
 
  
   
 
Xi (Alan) Zhang is an Assistant Professor in Marketing at College of Business and Innovation, 
University of Toledo. Toledo, OH 43606; Tel: 419.530.5516; Email: xi.zhang2@utoledo.edu . 
 
V. Kumar is the Regents’ Professor, Richard and Susan Lenny Distinguished Chair & Professor 
of Marketing, Executive Director of Center fo r Excellence in Brand & Customer Management, 
and Director of the Ph.D. Program in Marketi ng at J. Mack Robinson College of Business, 
Georgia State University. Atlanta, GA 30326; Chang Jiang Scholar, HUST, China, and Lee 
Kong Chian Fellow, Singapore Management  University, Singapore.  Tel: 404.413.7590; 
Email: vk@gsu.edu . 
 
Koray Cosguner is an Assistant Professor in Marketing at J. Mack  Robinson College of 
Business, Georgia State Universit y. Atlanta, GA 30303; Tel: 404.413.7697; Email: 
kcosguner@gsu.edu . 
 
 All authors contributed equally. 
 
 

 
 
2 
 Dynamically Managing a Profitable Email Marketing Program 
 
ABSTRACT 
Although email-marketing is highly profitable and widely used by marketers, it has received 
limited attention in marketing literature. Extant  research either focuses on customers’ email 
responses or studies the “average” ef fect of emails on purchases. In th is paper, we use data from a 
U.S. home improvement retailer to study customers’ email open and purchase behaviors by using 
a unified Hidden Markov and Copula framework. C ontrary to conventional wisdom, we find that 
email active customers are not necessarily active in  purchases, and vice versa. Furthermore, we 
find that the number of emails sent by the reta iler has a non-linear effect  on both the retailer’s 
short- and long-term profitab ility. Through a counterfactual st udy, we provide a decision support 
system to guide the retailer to make optimal email contact decisions. This study shows that sending the right number of emails is vi tal for long-term profitability. Fo r example, sending 4 (10) emails 
instead of the optimal number of 7 emails can cause  the retailer to lose 32% (16%) of its lifetime 
profit per customer.
 
Keywords: Email marketing, Hidden Markov m odels, Dynamic programming, Copula models 

 
 
3 
 Introduction 
Email marketing is a widely-used marketi ng tool by most B2B and B2C companies. A 
survey study by Ascend2 (2015) shows that 82% of  B2B and B2C companies use email technology 
as part of their marketing strate gies. In addition to its  widespread usage, email marketing can be 
quite profitable. According to a recent study publis hed by the Direct Marketing Association (UK), 
the average revenue-based return  on investment (ROI) of ema il marketing increased to £38 for 
each £1 spent compared to the average ROI of £24.93 reported in 2013 (DMA 2015). Based on the same study, roughly 1 in every 5 companies re port an ROI of more than £70 which is three 
times higher than the figures from 2013. Without a doubt, firms aim to generate higher ROI levels 
from email technology by launching effective ema il marketing programs. Although the firm’s goal 
is evident, firms may find it difficult to manage  effective email programs for multiple reasons.  
First, customers who are active in opening a firm’s emails may not be active in purchasing 
from the firm or vice versa. For example, so me heavy buyers may not open the firm’s emails 
frequently since they already know the firm and its offerings quite well. This implies that the firm 
may not need to target such customers aggressi vely through email marketing since this type of 
buyer may pay little to no attenti on to emails received. On the ot her hand, some light buyers might 
be quite responsive in opening the firm’s emails since they seek to get information through emails. Even though this type of customer opens emails more frequently, from the profit perspective, 
targeting such customers might be suboptimal for the firm since the chances of converting such 
customers to repeat-buye rs are likely low.  
Second, sending the right number of emails is cr itical for the firm’s pr ofitability, especially 
since most customers tend to complain about the large number of emails sent by firms. A survey 
study by BlueHornet (2013), a marketing firm focusing on email solutions, finds that email 

 
 
4 
 frequency might overtake c ontent irrelevance as an important reason that drives customers away 
from email marketing. Although sending the right nu mber of emails is paramount, finding that 
magic number is very challenging for a firm since not only do its cu stomers have different intrinsic 
preferences to emails (i.e., email open1 frequencies differ across customers), but customer 
preferences might change dynamically over tim e (i.e., within same customer, email open 
frequencies might differ over time). In other words,  the right number of em ails to send may differ 
across customers and over time. Consistent with this argument, a study by Return Path (2015), an 
industry expert company on email optimization, su ggests that email frequency optimization should 
depend on the engagement level of customers. Ho wever, the study does not provide an actionable 
tool for firms to adopt to launch e ffective email marketing programs.  
Third, managers tend to treat each email marke ting campaign as an independent solicitation 
process and fail to consider its long-term impa ct on the email open and purchase behaviors. In 
addition to immediate impact, an em ail might also affect the future  profitability of the firm by 
shifting the customer-firm rela tionship level (Luo and Kumar 2013). For example, customers 
opening emails might become more interested with the firm and its offerings, and ultimately, they 
might start to purchase more frequently. In this cas e, ignoring the long-term effects of emails might 
cause the firm to make suboptim al email marketing decisions. 
Due to all these challenges, firms need guidanc e in the form of a decision support system 
(DSS, hereafter) to decide the right number of em ails to send to different customers over time. In 
this study, our objective is to provide such a DSS to firms th rough 1) linking customers’ email 
open behaviors with their purchase behaviors, 2) capturing heterogeneity in email open and 
purchase behaviors across customers and over time, 3) incorporating the long-term effects of email 
                                                            
1 For this study, we define “email open” as the action of opening an email message.  

 
 
5 
 marketing on firm profitability. 
Methodologically, we propose a unified fr amework combining hidden Markov (HMM) 
(Netzer, Lattin and Srinivasan 2008) and Copula models (Danaher and Smith 2011). In the hidden 
Markov component of our model, we capture th e dynamics in customers’ purchase and email 
behaviors by allowing the latent relationship states to govern both behaviors. As later discussed, 
modeling the evolution of purchase and email states jointly is important in the context of email 
marketing since customers’ respons iveness in opening emails might also affect their relationship 
with the firm. In this regard, our study differs from the other st udies in the HMM domain which 
only focus on the customer’s purchase behavior and ignores the fact that other non-purchase 
activities may also aff ect the customer-firm relationship (e xcept the study by Schweidel et al. 
2014) level. In addition, customers’ email open and purchase behaviors might be correlated due to 
time-invariant factors like cust omer unobserved heterogeneity and time-variant factors like the 
unobserved customer-firm relationshi p states. In the Copula compone nt of our model, we use a 
bivariate Frank Copula to capture  that correlation. We model th e email open behavior using a 
binomial distribution (BD, hereafter) and the pur chase behavior using a zero-inflated negative 
binomial distribution (ZINBD, hereaf ter). In this regard, the Copul a component of our model also 
differs from most Copula applications in marketin g where Copulas are used to correlate variables 
coming from continuous distribution families (e xcept the study by Stephen and Galak (2012), in 
which double Poisson variables are first converted into continuous ones and treated as continuous 
in the estimation).  Substantively, we seek to answer the following questions:  (1) How the latent Markov states  govern customers’ purchase and email open behaviors,  
(2) Whether there is any correlation between cust omers’ email open and purchase behaviors,  

 
 
6 
 (3) How email contacts (i.e., number of emails sent  by a firm) affect customers’ purchase behavior 
both in the short and long run, and  (4) What the optimal number of emails is to send  to different customers over time to maximize the 
long-term firm profit? 
The empirical study identifies three cust omer-firm relationshi p states governing 
customers’ and email open and purchase behavior s: Low Open – Medium Purchase, High Open – 
Low Purchase and High Open – High Purchase stat es. In other words, email active customers may 
not be active in purchases; and email inactive customers may still be relatively active in their purchase behaviors. In addition, we find that the firm’s email c ontact policy has non-linear short- 
and long-term effects on customers’ purchase and email open behaviors as we ll as on the retailer’s 
profitability. Furthermore, from our Copula com ponent, we identify a positive correlation between 
the two customer behaviors. We next derive a dynamic email marketing resource allocation policy 
using the estimates from our proposed hidden Markov and Copula model of customer purchase 
and email open behaviors. This way, we provide a DSS to the firm (about the optimal number of 
emails to send) to maximize its lifetime profit. Based on our DSS, we find that the optimal number 
of emails to send not only differs across customers,  but also differs within the same customer over 
time significantly. In addition, we find that sending th e right number of emails is very critical from 
the firm’s profit perspective. For instance, sendi ng 4 (10) rather than the optimal number of 7 
emails per month causes the retailer to lose 32% (16%) of its lifetime profit. 
To reiterate our contribution, to  the best of our knowledge, this  is the first empirical study 
that jointly models cu stomers’ email open and purchase be haviors over time . Methodologically, 
our paper is the first study that combines the HMM and Copula approaches together in a unified 
framework. Therefore, this research provides not only important implications for firms to 

 
 
7 
 understand customers’ behavioral  attitudes towards email marketing, but also an easy-to-
implement modeling framework to marketing resear chers in the field. The proposed framework is 
flexible and marketing researchers in the fiel d can use it to study other non-purchase customer 
behaviors (including but not limite d to customers’ responses to other electronic and potentially 
interactive communications) that  are possibly correlated with purchase. The framework can 
incorporate, across customers and over time, unobserved behavioral heterogeneity. Finally, 
through our DSS, we provide substantive managerial  guidelines to firms to implement an effective 
email-marketing program. Similarly, our suggested DSS is also versatile and firms can use it to 
manage marketing decisions such as direct  mails, telephone and sa les person contacts. 
In the following sections, we first review th e literature on email ma rketing and customer 
relationship dynamics in email marketing. Second, we describe our data and present descriptive 
statistics. Third, we discuss our modeling framew ork. Fourth, we present the empirical results. 
Fifth, we derive the optimal email marketing c ontact policy for the firm. Sixth, we discuss the 
robustness of our proposed model. Finally, we su mmarize our findings, and conclude with caveats 
and directions for future research. 
Literature Review 
Email Marketing  
There are several reasons for email marketing’ s popularity. First, emails enable marketers 
to send messages to their cust omers at very low cost. Chittend en and Rettie (2003) demonstrate 
that the total cost for acqui sition and retention campaigns of email to be $26,500 per 5,000 
customers, as compared to that of direct mail at $69,600 per 5,000 customers. Second, email messaging requires less preparation and execution time. Industry practice shows that an email 
marketing campaign targeting 50,000 customers needs only 6 hours to prepare and run; while a 

 
 
8 
 similar size direct mail campaign needs 17 days be fore it can reach a targeted customer’s mailbox. 
Third, emails typically generate faster res ponse and create opportunity for interactive 
communication with customers. For example, a customer can respond to a email the moment 
he/she receives it by clicking the hyperlinks that direct him/her to the sender firm’s website via 
his/her computer or mobile device.  
In this study, we focus on permission-base d email marketing. Permission-based email 
marketing requires marketers to seek the cust omers’ permission before sending them email 
messages (Godin 1999; Kumar, Zhang and Luo 2014). This type of email marketing intends to 
maintain a repeat purchase relationship with cust omers, rather than getting customers to buy one 
time only. In line with this idea, previous research  shows that email marketing has a positive effect 
on customer loyalty. Tezinde et al. (2002) discove r that email advertisements are useful to 
customers by inducing them to visit the physical st ore. Merisavo and Raulas (2004) find that email 
marketing can enhance customer attitudinal lo yalty towards the brand. Their study shows that 
customers tend to recommend the email messages to their friends if they find the messages 
interesting and useful. 
Although the overall influence of email marketi ng is positive, we argue that researchers 
and practitioners should examine the customers’  response to email-based marketing messages 
based on two perspectives. First, customers open and read an email simply to keep track of the 
firm’s products and offerings. This behavior does not necessarily indicate that they are actively 
looking for information to assist  their purchase decisions. Bonfre r and Dreze (2009) study a series 
of email marketing campaigns and propose a bivari ate hazard model to predict when customers 
open or click an email. Kumar, Zhang and Luo (2014)  look at the total numb er of emails that are 
opened and clicked and investigate their impact on the time the customers subscribe to the email 

 
 
9 
 program. Second and more importantly, customers make purchases because of email marketing 
messages. Sahni, Zou and Chintagun ta (2016) analyze 70 randomized field-experiments and find 
that email promotions not only increase customers’ average purchase spending during the promotion window, but also carry over to a week later after the promotion expires. Kumar, Zhang 
and Luo (2014) find that the average email open-rate has a positive effect on average purchase spending while the effect of the average ema il click-rate is not significant.      
 Although there are studies that consider each of these two perspectives separately—email 
open and purchase, it is surprisi ng that there is no study investig ating both behaviors together. 
Bonfrer and Dreze (2009) do not c onsider the possible link betw een email open/click rate and 
purchase behavior due to the limitation of thei r data. Kumar, Zhang and Luo (2014) capture the 
“average” effect of the customer’s  response to emails on purchase,  but they do not consider the 
dynamics and heterogeneity in both email open and purchase behaviors. Sahni, Zou and Chintagunta (2016) conduct a post-hoc  analysis of the experiments to show the aggregate-level 
effects of emails on customer expenditure. They  do not quantify how emai l open behavior affects 
customer purchase nor do they consider the dynamic effects. 
Customer Relationship in Email Marketing 
Previous research shows that the customers’ relationship with the fi rm evolves over their 
lifetime. Netzer et al. (2008) propose a hidden Ma rkov model to study the transitions of customers 
among their latent relationship states with the firm. Following Netzer et al. (2008), hidden Markov 
models were widely used by marketing researchers across a wide range of marketing settings (Montoya et al., 2010; Kumar et al ., 2011; Li et al., 2011; Luo and Kumar, 2013). This stream of 
research primarily examines the evolution of customer-firm relationshi ps by only looking at the 
purchase behavior, whereas we argu e that other customer activities along with the purchase, such 

 
 
10 
 as customers’ email open behavior, can also rev eal useful information. Conceptually, we claim 
that studying customers’ email open and purchase behaviors jointly is necessary for multiple reasons. First, there is a possible correlation be tween the two behaviors. For example, customers 
who are active in purchasing from a firm may also  actively search and examine information about 
the firm and its offerings by openi ng and reading emails. In contra st, customers who are inactive 
in purchasing from the firm may not be interested in reading emails related to the firm either. Second, the email open behavior might carry relevant  information related to the level of customer-
firm relationship. In other words, for a customer , being active or passive in opening emails might 
also affect her relationship level with the firm , and more importantly (t hrough this effect on the 
relationship level) affect her pur chase behavior. For example, assume we have two customers at 
the same relationship level with the firm and eac h make the same purchases in the current period. 
If this was the case, the purchase only model w ould predict the same level for the customer-firm 
relationship for the next period. Ho wever, if one of the customers is also active in opening emails, 
due to her email activity, his/her customer-firm re lationship level might be different compared to 
the other customer. A purchase only model cannot cap ture this difference in the relationship level 
of the two customers. Due to this reasoning, we  characterize the customer-firm relationship by 
jointly utilizing customer-level email open and purchase information. 
To the best of our knowledge, Schweidel et al. (2014) is the only study that models the 
customer-firm relationship by utilizing both custom er-level purchase and non-purchase behaviors. 
They study the dependence of two customer behavi ors, i.e., digital purchase and digital posting, 
and the evolution of the associated customer-fir m relationship. One of the important findings is 
there is a correlation between the latent attribution processes of the two activities, meaning a customer’s involvement in one activity is informa tive of another. Methodologically, we differ from 

 
 
11 
 Schweidel et al. (2014) since 1)  in that we use a Hidden Mar kov model rather than a latent 
changepoint framework; 2) we use a Copula mode l to capture the correlation between purchase 
and email open behaviors rather than a multivariate choice framework. More importantly, our research differs from Schweidel et al. (2014) in that we additionally provide a DSS that allows 
firms to allocate resources by utilizing informati on from two or more customer-based activities. 
Due to this, ours is the first empirical study mode ling customer relationship over multiple customer 
decisions and which provides a DSS to help the firm maximize its lifetime profit. We summarize 
the characteristics of the aforementioned studies along with our study in Table 1.  
Insert Table 1 
To provide an effective DSS to guide a firm to make profitable email marketing decisions, 
one needs a good predictive model (that will be an  input to the DSS) of customer purchase and 
email open behaviors. A good predictive model must accommodate the following three critical 
factors. First, across customers, the intensity  of purchase and email open behaviors might be 
different. For example, some customers might regular ly check emails (possibly to keep themselves 
updated with new product offering s or recent promotional offers) but may not be active in 
purchasing. On the other hand, some customers mi ght be very active in purchases, but may not 
open emails frequently (they possibly know the firm  and its offerings quite well). Due to these 
inherent differences in behavior  across customers, capturing the heterogeneity in customers’ email 
open and purchase behaviors is critical  in predicting their behaviors.  
Second, customers’ email responsiveness and purchase activeness may evolve over time 
since customers have varying inte rests and needs at different time s. For example, at the initial 
period of joining the email program, customers c ould be extremely active in opening emails to 
know more about the firm but thei r purchase activities may not ca tch up with their enthusiasm 

 
 
12 
 with the emails. After spending some time and effort getting to know the firm, customers may 
become familiar and favorable to the firm. Havi ng that said, they might reduce the amount of 
attention they pay to the emails but unsurprisingl y increase their purchase activities. Therefore, it 
is also critical for firms to understand such dyna mics in both behaviors to predict the customer’s 
email open and purchase levels. Fi nally, there is a possible correla tion between customers’ email 
open and purchase behaviors, and firms need  to understand such dependence between the 
behaviors to predict them accu rately. Consequently, a good predictive model (of customers’ 
purchase and email behaviors) must incorporat e 1) customer heterogeneity, 2) customer-
relationship dynamics; and 3) correl ation among customers’ behaviors. 
 Our paper contributes to the cu stomer relationship literature, by jointly studying customers’ 
email open and purchase behaviors in the sa me modeling framework. Methodologically, we 
propose a unified Hidden Markov and Copula framew ork that can capture not only the correlation 
between customer email open and pu rchase behaviors but also the evolution of the customer-firm 
relationship states controlling these two behaviors.  Our model is flexible that purchase activeness 
does not necessarily align with email responsivene ss. In other words, cust omers who are active in 
purchases may not be active in opening emails , or vice versa. In addition, we account for 
unobserved customer heterogeneity  in both customer activities through our random coefficient 
specification. After estimation of  the proposed model, the estimat ed model becomes an input to 
our dynamic programming model, in which we devel op a DSS to guide the firm to make profitable 
email marketing decisions. In the following sections , we first describe our dataset, and next, we 
discuss our modeling framework.  
Data Description 
Our database comprises information from a home  improvement retailer in the United States. 

 
 
13 
 The retailer sells products and services from multiple categories, such as Kitchen, Plumbing, 
Electrical, Flooring, Paint, and Outdoors. The da taset consists of information on the purchase 
transactions made by the customers2, the number of emails sent by the firm to these customers, 
and the customer’s email open histories. The average inter-purchase time is approximately 6 
months but typically ranges from a couple of w eeks to a few months. Because of the variety and 
complexity of the products, the large number of cat egories, and the lack of  transactional data at 
the category level, we study the ov erall purchase behavior instead of  the purchase behavior at the 
category level. 
To form a sample of data for model esti mation, we randomly select a cohort of 200 
customers who opted-in to the retailer’s email program in February 2007. These customers have 
remained in the email program throughout the obse rvation window and have received emails from 
the firm continuously3. Thus, we have data comprising customers’ email open and purchase 
activities over a period of 39 m onths. Although we do not have information on the content of the 
emails, according to the management team of the fo cal firm, the type of content contained in these 
emails varies significantly. The emails could be  informative of new products or sales events, 
persuasive featuring key benefits of the products, or a combination of the two types. In any given 
email, the firm generally features products from multiple categories such as Kitchen, Lumber and Flooring. 
In Table 2, we report the descriptive statistics  and the correlation matrix of the customer 
(purchase and email open) and firm (email contacts) level behaviors. On average, the retailer sent 
6.90 emails to its customers per month. The customers open 1.64 emails and make 0.69 purchases 
                                                            
2 Although customers have the option to buy online and offline, 95% of the observed purchase transactions are 
offline. 
3 We observe that less than 1% of the customers in our data base opted-out from the firm’s email marketing program. 
We only include the customers who have stayed in the email program during the observation window.  

 
 
14 
 on average per month. Note that we only count uni que email opens because most the emails are 
only opened once, if opened. The correlation matrix  shows that the number of purchases has a 
weak correlation with the num ber of emails sent and th e number of emails opened.  
Insert Table 2 
To demonstrate the complexity of customers’ purchase and email open behavior, we 
randomly select three customers from our database , and plot their purchase count and email open 
frequency over the observation period of 39 months (see Figure 1). Customer 1 is not active in 
either purchase or opening emails. Customer 1 only makes purchases in three months and opens emails in two months. The time elapsed between  the first and second purchase is 21 months. 
Customer 1 ceases to purchase or open emails after month 26. In comparison, Customer 2 has a more active purchase behavior over the course of 39 months. However, Cust omer 2 is not equally 
active in opening emails as he/she only opens em ails in two months—month 10 and 11. In addition, 
we find that Customer 2 decreases his/her purch ase behavior after month 19, demonstrating a time-
variant purchase behavior. Customer 3 is modera tely active in both purchase and opening emails. 
We observe that the average inter-purchase tim e of Customer 3 is approximately 4 months. 
Insert Figure 1 here 
Figure 1 shows that customers’ purchase and email open behaviors are both heterogeneous 
and time-variant, and that purchas e and email open behaviors are not perfectly al igned with each 
other. The observed pattern indicates that the tw o behaviors may possibly co rrelate with each other 
as well. In the subsequent section of our m odeling framework, we discuss how we model the 
heterogeneity, dynamics and the correlation in purchase and email open behaviors.  
In addition, to understand the process of cu stomer purchase and email open frequency, we 
plot the distributions of both behaviors (see Figu re 2). The distribution of purchase count shows 

 
 
15 
 that a discrete distribution such as a Poisson pr ocess may be able to capture the data generating 
process. However, the mean (0.68) and the varian ce (2.64) of the purchase count variable suggest 
over-dispersion, which violates the underlying a ssumption of Poisson distribution. Furthermore, 
we observe an excess of zero purchases (71%) that can affect the estimation of the Poisson model. 
To account for both the over-dispersion and excess of zeros, we use the zero-inflated negative binomial distribution (ZINBD) to mo del the purchase count variable. 
 The distribution of email open count also suggests a discrete distribution. The (unique) 
email open count is the number of unique emails that are opened conditional on the total number of emails received in each month. We observe that  the maximum number of the emails sent (per 
customer and per month) in our data set is 20 emails. Therefore, the number of unique emails 
available to a customer to open cannot exceed 20. To cap ture this process, we use the typical 
binomial distribution (BD) which captures the number of success (email open) in a sequence of 
events (receiving emails).        
Insert Figure 2 here 
Modeling Framework 
In line with previous research, we use a hi dden Markov model to identify customer-firm 
relationship states and the transitions among these states. An HMM describes a Markov process using discrete latent states. HMM is a stochastic model used to capture the transition between these 
latent states and translate these states to obs erved behaviors. HMMs are widely used in the 
marketing literature to study cust omer-firm relationships (e.g., Net zer el al. 2008; Montoya et al. 
2010; Kumar et al. 2011; Luo and Kumar 2013). In th e context of email marketing, we use a HMM 

 
 
16 
 to study two observed customer behavi ors jointly: purchase and email open4. In our setting, the 
latent states of the Markov process translate into  different levels of customer-firm relationships 
that yield different purchase and email open activ eness for customers. In addition, since there is a 
possible correlation between customers’ purchas e and email open behavi ors, we capture the 
correlation between the two beha viors through a Frank Copula f unction (see Figure 3 for the 
graphical illustration of our pr oposed hidden Markov and Copula m odel of customer purchase and 
email open behaviors). 
Insert Figure 3 here 
In the following section, we first discuss th e primitives of our HMM. Second, we specify 
our conditional (on latent states  of the Markov process) email open and purchase models. Third, 
we illustrate how we capture the correlation be tween state-dependent email open and purchase 
behaviors through our Frank Copul a component. Fourth, we discus s the model estimation. Finally, 
we discuss the model identification.  
Overview of the Model         
Let ܱ௜௧ be the number of emails customer ݅ opens at time5 t. Let ܻ௜௧ be the number of 
purchases customer ݅ makes at time t. For customer i, we model the sequen ce of observations 
ሼሺܻ௜ଵൌݕ௜ଵ,ܱ௜ଵൌ݋௜ଵሻ,…,ሺሺܻ௜௧ൌݕ௜௧,ܱ௜௧ൌ݋௜௧ሻሽ using a HMM characterized by (1) the initial 
state distribution ሺ࢏࣒ሻ, (2) a sequence of tr ansition probabilities ሺ࢚࢏ࡽሻ, and (3) a vector of 
                                                            
4 In addition to our earlier discussion (in the Customer Relationship in Email Marketing part of our literature review 
section) related to the conceptual need of joint modeli ng, we provide two pieces of empirical evidence in our Web 
Appendix showing that the joint model is indeed an empirical requirement. First, we conduct a simulation study in which the joint model (bivariate email open and purchase) is compared with the purchase only model (univariate 
purchase). We find that the estimated (from a simulated dataset generated from the bivariate model) bivariate model 
recovers the assumed parameters more closely and efficien tly compared to the estimated (from the same simulated 
dataset) univariate model. Second, we show that based on  the actual data fit, the estimated (from the observed 
empirical purchase data) univariate model predicts the purc hase behavior by 16% worse than the estimated (from the 
observed empirical purchase and email open data) bivariate model. See our Web Appendix for further discussion.   
5 The unit of time is a month in our study. Therefore, we use time t and month t interchangeably throughout the paper. 

 
 
17 
 probabilities that relate the latent states to  the observed purchase a nd email open behaviors ሺ࢚࢏ࡴሻ. 
The Initial State Distribution 
At any given month t, let s denote the level of customer i’s relationship. Let ߰௜௦ be the 
probability that customer ݅ is initially in relationship state s, where ߰௜௦൒0 and ∑߰௜௦ൌ1ேௌ
௦ୀଵ , 
where NS is the number of the latent Markov states. In this study, we  assume that all customers 
start at the lowest relationship st ate in the first month. Therefore, ࢏߰′ൌൣ ߰௜ଵ,߰௜ଶ,…,߰௜,ேௌ൧ൌ
ሾ1,0,…,0ሿ. 
The Markov Chain Transition Matrix  
 In our proposed HMM framework, we allow customers to transit to any relationship 
state	ݏ ൌ 1,2,…,ܵܰ . Following Kumar et al. (2011), we us e a multinomial logit specification to 
formulate this transition process. We  define the transition matrix as 
                                 State at t   
(1)  State at t-1 1 2 … NS  
 1 ݍ௜௧,ଵ→ଵ  ݍ௜௧,ଵ→ଶ  … ݍ௜௧,ଵ→ேௌ   
ۿ௜,௧ିଵ→௧ൌ 2 ݍ௜௧,ଶ→ଵ  ݍ௜௧,ଶ→ଶ  … ݍ௜௧,ଶ→ேௌ   
 ⋮ ⋮ ⋮ ⋱ ⋮  
 NS ݍ௜௧,ேௌ→ଵݍ௜௧,ேௌ→ଶ … ݍ௜௧,ேௌ→ேௌ   
ݍ௜௧,௦→௦ᇲ is the probability that customer ݅ moves from state ݏ at time ݐെ1  to state ݏ′ at time ݐ ,
where 0൑ݍ௜௧,௦→௦′൑1 ,∀ ݏ,ݏ ′ ,and ∑ݍ௜௧,௦→௦′ൌ1௦′ . We specify the indirect transition utility 
of customer i for transitioning from the relationship state ݏ at period ݐെ1  to state ݏ′ at time ݐ 
(ܷ௜௧,௦→௦′) as follows: 
ܷ௜௧,௦→௦′ൌܸ௜௧,௦→௦′൅݁௜௧,௦→௦′ (2)  
where ݁௜௧,௦→௦′ and ܸ௜௧,௦→௦′ denote the stochastic and determ inistic components of the above 

 
 
18 
 indirect utility, respec tively. We assume that ݁௜௧,௦→௦′for i=1,…,N , t=1,…,T , s, s’=1,…,NS  are 
distributed i.i.d. Gumbel with location 0 and scale 1. We operationalize the deterministic 
component, ܸ௜௧,௦→௦′, as follows:  
ܸ௜௧,௦→௦′ൌߙ௦→௦′൅ߛ௦→௦′ܺ௜,௧ିଵ (3)  
where ߙ௦→௦′ is the intrinsic utility of transitioning from relationship state ݏ to s’ at time  t. ܺ௜,௧ିଵ 
contains the following variables: I[ ܱ௜,௧ିଵ൐0 ሿ , ܫሾܻ௜,௧ିଵ൐0 ሿ , ܯܧ௜,௧ିଵ, ܯܧ௜,௧ିଵଶ; where I[A] is the 
indicator function that takes the value of 1 when event A occurs and the value of  0 otherwise, 
ܱ௜,௧ିଵ is the lagged email open count, ܻ௜,௧ିଵ  is the lagged purchase count, ܯܧ௜,௧ିଵ is the number 
of emails sent by the firm at time t-1. ߛ௦→௦′ൌሾ ߛଵ,௦→௦′, ߛଶ,௦→௦′, ߛଷ,௦→௦′, ߛସ,௦→௦′ሿ is the vector 
of corresponding response coefficients. We nor malize the deterministic utility for customer ݅ at 
time ݐ to transition to the lowest state ( ܸ௜௧,௦→ଵ ) to be zero for the iden tification purpose, i.e., 
ܷ௜௧,௦→ଵൌ݁௜௧,௦→ଵ , where ݁௜௧,௦→ଵ  for i=1,…,N , t=1,…,T , s =1,…,NS  are distributed i.i.d. Gumbel 
with location 0 and scale 1. Therefore, the transition probability for customer i, transitioning from 
state ݏ to ݏ′ at time t (ݍ௜௧,௦→௦′) becomes the well-known multinomial Logit share function as seen 
below. 
ݍ௜௧,௦→௦′ൌexpሺܸ௜௧,௦→௦′ሻ
1൅∑expሺܸ௜௧,௦→௞ሻேௌ
௞ୀଶ (4)  
Next, we discuss our conditional email count (C EOM, hereafter) and purchase count models 
(CPM, hereafter). 
Conditional Email Open Count Model (CEOM) 
We assume that the number of emails customer ݅( in state s) opens at time ݐ follows a BD 
with parameters ܯܧ௜௧ and ݌௜௧|௦, given by 

 
 
19 
  ܲሺܱ௜௧ൌ݋௜௧|ݏሻൌ൬ܯܧ௜௧
݋௜௧൰݌௜௧|௦௢೔೟൫1െ݌ ௜௧|௦൯ாெ೔೟ି௢೔೟ (5)   
where ݌௜௧|௦ is the conditional probability that customer ݅( in state s) opens an email in month ݐ .We 
model ݌௜௧|௦ as a function of customers’ past  email open behavior as follows. 
 ݌௜௧|௦ൌexp൫ߙ௜௢|௦൅ߚ௜௢lnሾܱܮ௜௧ሿ൯
1൅exp൫ߙ ௜௢|௦൅ߚ௜௢lnሾܱܮ௜௧ሿ൯ (6)   
where ߙ௜௢|௦ and ߚ௜௢  capture the intrinsic utility of openi ng an email and the effect of duration 
dependence, given state ݏ ,respectively. We capture the dura tion dependence through time from 
the last email open variable, i.e., ܱܮ௜௧. We use the natural logarithm of ܱܮ௜௧ to capture the 
diminishing effect. For identification purpose,  we impose the following restrictions: 1) ߙ௜௢|௦ାଵൌ
ߙ௜௢|௦൅exp൫∆ߙ ௜௢|௦ାଵ൯, where ∆ߙ௜௢|௦ାଵ  is a parameter to estimate from the data, 2) ߚ௜௢ is state-
invariant. These two restrictions guarantee that customers in a higher relationship state, all else 
being equal, have a higher probab ility to open emails than those in  a lower state. In addition, we 
allow both ߙ௜௢|௦ and ߚ௜௢ to be customer-specific to control for the unobserved customer 
heterogeneity. We assume that ߙ௜௢|௦ and ߚ௜௢ are distributed with the following normal 
distributions.6 
 ߙ௜௢|௦ൌߙ௢|௦൅ߙ׏௜௢ 
ߚ௜௢ൌߚ௢൅ߚ׏௜௢ (7)  
where ߙ׏௜௢~N൫0,ߪ ఈ೚ଶ൯	and ߚ׏௜௢~N൫0,ߪఉ೚ଶ൯. 
 
Conditional Purchase Count Model (CPM) 
                                                            
6 We acknowledge that the random coef ficient specification we implemented here  might not fully capture all the cross-
sectional heterogeneity that might exist. Using customer-level fixed effects might better tease out the unobserved 
customer-level heterogeneity. However, we believe that th e use of random coefficient specification is a reasonable 
compromise due its high parsimony over the customer fixed effect specification. 

 
 
20 
           Conditional on being in the relationship state ݏ at time ݐ ,we assume that the number of 
purchases that customer ݅ makes follows a ZINBD with parameters ߮௜௧|௦, ߣ௜௧|௦ and ݎ .For each 
observation ݕ௜௧, ZINBD assumes that there are two data  generating processes (based on whether 
the outcome is equal to zero or is gr eater than zero) which are defined as: 
 ܲሺܻ௜௧ൌݕ௜௧|ݏሻ
ൌ
ەۖ۔ۖۓ߮௜௧|௦൅൫1െ߮ ௜௧|௦൯ቆ1൅ߣ௜௧|௦
ݎቇି௥
																																					ݕ	݂݅ ௜௧ൌ0
൫1െ߮ ௜௧|௦൯߁ሺݕ௜௧൅ݎሻ
ݕ௜௧!߁ሺݎሻቆ1൅ߣ௜௧|௦
ݎቇି௥
ቆ1൅ݎ
ߣ௜௧|௦ቇି௬೔೟
ݕ݂݅ ௜௧൐0 (8)  
where ݎ is a dispersion parameter that is assumed not to depend on covariates. The conditional 
mean and variance of the ZINBD are given as ܧሺݕ௜௧|ݏሻൌ൫ 1െ߮ ௜௧|௦൯ߣ௜௧|௦ and ݎܸܽሺݕ௜௧|ݏሻൌ
൫1െ߮ ௜௧|௦൯ߣ௜௧|௦൫1൅߮ ௜௧|௦ߣ௜௧|௦൅ߣ௜௧|௦⁄ݎ൯, respectively. ߮௜௧|௦ and ߣ௜௧|௦ capture the conditional 
zero-inflated probability and conditional  expected purchase count for customer ݅( in state s) at time 
ݐ ,respectively. 
 To account for the excess of no purchases , we model the conditional zero-inflation 
component of the ZINBD ሺ߮௜௧|௦ሻ as 
 ߮௜௧|௦ൌ1
1൅expሺߜ ଴௜|௦൅ߜଵ௜|௦lnሾܻܮ௜௧ሿሻ (9)  
where ߜ଴௜|௦ and ߜଵ௜|௦ capture the intrinsic utility of making  a purchase and the effect of duration 
dependence, given state ݏ ,respectively. We capture the dura tion dependence through time from 
the last purchase variable, i.e., ܻܮ௜௧. We use the natural logarithm of ܻܮ௜௧ to capture the diminishing 
effect. To account for the unobserved heterogeneity, we allow ߜ௞௜|௦ (for ݇ൌ0 , 1 ) to be customer-
specific. We assume that ߜ௞௜|௦ (for ݇ൌ0 , 1 ) are normally distributed across customers as follows. 

 
 
21 
  ߜ௞௜|௦ൌߜ௞|௦൅ߜ׏௞௜,݇ൌ0,1  (10)  
where ߜ׏௞௜~N൫0,ߪఋೖଶ൯	for ݇ൌ0 , 1 .   
We model the second component of the c onditional purchase model, i.e., conditional 
expected purchase count ( ߣ௜௧|௦), as a function of the number of emails sent by the firm ( ܯܧ௜௧), that 
is given by 
 ߣ௜௧|௦ൌe x p ൫ ߙ ௜௣|௦൅ߚଵ,௜௣|௦ܯܧ௜௧൅ߚଶ,௜௣|௦ܯܧ௜௧ଶ൯ (11)  
Conditional on state ݏ ,ߙ௜௣|௦ is the intrinsic propensity to make purchases, ߚଵ,௜௣|௦  and ߚଶ,௜௣|௦  
are the corresponding response parameters. Note that, unlike the CEOM, we do not impose any 
identification restrictions on the parameters of the CPM. In other words, we do not make any 
restrictions such as ߙ௜௣|ଵ൑ߙ௜௣|ଶ൑⋯൑ߙ ௜௣|ேௌ  and/or ߜ଴௜|ଵ൑ߜ଴௜|ଶ൑⋯൑ߜ ଴௜|ேௌ . This 
restriction free specif ication (in the CPM) allows our model to  be flexible such that, for example, 
customers in a more active email open state may be less likely to be active in purchases, or vice versa. In other words, instead of  pre-imposing restrictions such that email active customers must 
be active on purchases, we let th e data to speak about whethe r this is really the case. 
To account for the unobserved heterogeneity, we allow ߙ
௜௣|௦, ߚଵ,௜௣|௦  and ߚଶ,௜௣|௦  to be 
customer-specific. We assume that ߙ௜௣|௦ and ߚ௞,௜௣|௦  (for ݇ൌ1 , 2 ) are normally distributed across 
customers as follows: 
 ߙ௜௣|௦ൌߙ௣|௦൅∆ߙ௜௣ 
ߚ௞,௜௣|௦ൌߚ௞,௣|௦൅∆ߚ௞,௜௣,݇ൌ1,2  (12)  
where ∆ߙ௜௣~Nቀ0,ߪ ఈ೛ଶቁ	and ∆ߚ௞,௜௣~Nቀ0,ߪఉೖ,೛ଶቁ for k=1,2 .   
The Correlation between Purchase and Email Open Behavior 
In each month, both the number of emails opened and purchases made by a customer might 

 
 
22 
 possibly indicate the customer’s inte rest to and level of interactions  with the firm. Thus, we argue 
that there is a possible correlation between purchas e and email open count di stributions. Note that 
both the purchase count ܻ௜௧ and the email open count ܱ௜௧ follow a discrete di stribution. It is not 
easy to find a bivariate distribut ion that can capture the correlation between the ZINBD and the 
BD.    Danaher and Smith (2011) pioneer the use of Copula approach in marketing to link two 
marginal distributions that are not from the same family. Copula models are used in various studies 
to study multi-dimensional marketing problems (e .g., Park and Gupta 2012; Stephen and Galak 
2012; Schweidel and Knox 2013; Kumar, Zha ng and Luo 2014; Glady, Lemmens, and Croux 
2015). However, most studies focus on using Copul a models to correlate variables coming from 
continuous distribution families.  Stephen and Galak (2012) mode l multivariate count variables 
using a double Poisson model, but they convert thes e discrete variables into  continuous ones first 
and use the Gaussian Copula to co rrelate these converted variables.  In the context of this study, 
we are dealing with two discrete variables that  are characterized by two distinct distributions—
ZINBD and BD. It is uncertain whether Stephen a nd Galak (2012)’s approach will work with such 
distinct discrete distributions. In addition, for e fficiency, modeling the correlation between the two 
discrete variables directly rather than convertin g them to continuous ones first and treating them 
as continuous is more desirable.   
To tackle the challenge of correlating discrete distributions, we turn to the literature of 
mathematics and statistics. Based on Sklar’s theorem (1959), in a bi variate case as an example, the 
cumulative distribution functions (cdfs) of any two va riables can be conne cted using a Copula 
function, and such Copula function is unique if  the two variables are continuous. With two 
continuous variables, the bivariate density can be derived from the pa rtial derivatives of the chosen 

 
 
23 
 Copula function. With two discrete  variables, such as the biva riate count data in this study, 
although we cannot rely on partial derivatives, we can still obtain the bivariate probability mass 
function (pmf) using finite differences of the c hosen Copula function. There are several statistical 
applications of the idea to m odel bivariate count data. Lee ( 1999) develop a bivariate negative 
binomial distribution to model r ugby league scores using Frank Copula. Song (2000) develops a 
multivariate dispersion model ge nerated from Gaussian Copula.  Nikoloulopoulos and Karlis 
(2010) capture the association between the purc hase counts of certa in product categories. 
Following Nikoloulopoulos and Karl is (2010) and others, we us e a Copula to construct the 
bivariate pmf of ܱ௜௧ and ܻ௜௧ as follows:  
 ݄ሺ݋௜௧,ݕ௜௧ሻൌܥ൫ ܨଵሺ݋௜௧ሻ,ܨଶሺݕ௜௧ሻ൯െܥ൫ܨ ଵሺ݋௜௧െ1ሻ,ܨଶሺݕ௜௧ሻ൯
െܥ൫ܨଵሺ݋௜௧ሻ,ܨଶሺݕ௜௧െ1ሻ൯൅ܥ൫ܨ ଵሺ݋௜௧െ1ሻ,ܨଶሺݕ௜௧െ1ሻ൯ (13)  
where ܥሺ∙ሻ is the Copula function, ܨଵሺ݋௜௧ሻ and ܨଶሺݕ௜௧ሻ are the distribution function of ܱ௜௧ and ܻ௜௧, 
respectively. We use Frank Copula (e.g., Frank 1979;  Genest 1987) in this context because of its 
flexibility to capture the full range of co rrelation. The Frank Copul a function is given by 
 ܥሺݑଵ,ݑଶ;ߠሻൌെ1
ߠlogቊ1൅൫݁ିఏ௨భെ1൯൫݁ିఏ௨మെ1൯
݁ିఏെ1ቋ (14)  
where ݑଵ and ݑଶ are the distribution functions (Z INBD and BD in our case) and ߠ is the Frank 
Copula correlation parameter. 
Endogeneity Correction  
There is a possibility that the firm is targ eting customers by sending different number of 
emails based on their past purchas e activities and inhere nt characteristics (t hat are unobserved to 
the researcher). In other words, the email contact variable (i.e., EM) might be endogenous. To 
solve this potential endogeneity problem in EM, we use a control functi on approach (Petrin and 

 
 
24 
 Train 2010, the idea of which is like the approach  in Villas-Boas and Winer (1999). This involves 
running a first-stage li near regression of EM on instruments7, which include customer-level 
purchase recency, purchase freque ncy (to capture customers’ past purchase activeness) and 
customer level fixed effects (to capture every other customer-level  characteristics that are possibly 
observed by the firm (to do targeted emailing), but not the researcher). From the first-step regression, we obtain an R
2 of 48.5%. In addition, we find the co efficients of purchase recency and 
frequency to be positive and statistically signif icant. In the second step, we incorporate the 
residuals from the first-stage regression as addi tional control variables into the HMM transition 
(Equation 3) and CPM (Equation 11) components  of our proposed customer email open and 
purchase model. 
Model Estimation  
          There are four sets of parameters to  be estimated from our model: 1) parameters of the the 
transition matrix (Equation 3); 2) parameters of th e CEOM (Equations (6-7); 3) parameters of the 
CPM (Equations 9-12); 4) the correlation parame ter of the Frank Copula function (Equation 14). 
Following Netzer et al. (2008), we write the vector of the bivariat e probability mass function as a 
diagonal matrix ܜܑ۶ .Given the proposed HMM structure, the likelihood function for a sequence 
of observations ሼሺܻ௜ଵൌݕ௜ଵ,ܱ௜ଵൌ݋௜ଵሻ,…,ሺሺܻ௜௧ൌݕ௜௧,ܱ௜௧ൌ݋௜௧ሻሽ can be expressed as 
 ܮ ൌ ෑܲሺሺܻ ௜ଵൌݕ௜ଵ,ܱ௜ଵൌ݋௜ଵሻ,…,ሺܻ௜௧ൌݕ௜௧,ܱ௜௧ൌ݋௜௧ሻሻே
௜ୀଵ
ൌෑૐܑ′ܑ۶૚ே
௜ୀଵෑܜܑۿ்
௧ୀଶܜܑ۶( 15)  
                                                            
7 Since the variation in EM variable is large, we treat it as a continuous variable rather than discrete in our 
application. In addition, we run a Poisson regression and find that residuals from that count regression and the linear regression are highly correlated ( r=0.97). 

 
 
25 
 where ૚ is an ܵൈ1  vector of ones.  
Model Identification 
 Since all model components (transition matr ix, CEOM and CPM) always enter the 
likelihood calculation (see Equation 15) as a bundle, it is not possible to se parately identify the 
coefficients of a specific variable if that variab le is used repeatedly across different equations. 
Consequently, we choose and use a distinct set of variables in different co mponents of our model. 
The chosen variables represent customers’ past ac tivities and the firm’s past and current marketing 
activities; and their choice  is in line with the CRM literature (e .g., Netzer et al. 2008; Kumar et al. 
2011; Li et al. 2011). Specifi cally, we model customer i’s transition probability (from period t-1 
to t) among the states of the Markov process as a function of interactions between customer i and 
the firm at period t-1. We use ܱ௜,௧ିଵ, ܻ௜,௧ିଵ to capture the recent in teraction of the customer i with 
the firm, and ܯܧ௜,௧ିଵ  to capture the firm’s recent interaction with customer i. We model the 
CEOM component as a function of the customer i’s time from the last email open variable, i.e., 
ܱܮ௜௧. We model the CPM component as a function of customer i’s time from the last purchase 
variable ( ܻܮ௜௧) and the firm’s email marketing contact policy ( ܯܧ௜௧). Also, note that we use lagged 
and contemporaneous levels of customer and firm level behavioral variable s in the transition and 
conditional behavior (CEOM and CPM) components of  our model. Since we have sufficient within 
variable variation (for these be havioral variables) over time, we  would be able to separately 
identify all three components of our mode l, i.e., the transition, CEOM and CPM. 
We identify the parameters of  each of the abovementioned component as follows. For the 
transition component itself, we observe a signifi cant within customer behavior (email open and 
purchase) variation over time. This implies that cu stomers’ relationship leve ls with the firm vary 
significantly over time. This is the key for us to empirically identify parameters of the transition 

 
 
26 
 component (i.e., the parameters in Equation 3). Within relations hip levels, we also observe 
customers behaving differently, and this helps us  identify the unobserved customer heterogeneity 
parameters (i.e., the parameters of the heterogene ity distributions in Equations 7, 10 and 12).  For 
the CEOM and CPM components, we observe a signi ficant within time variat ion across email open 
and purchase behaviors of customers. For example, at a given time, some customers are active in 
one, some active in both behaviors, and some passi ve in both. In addition, within customers, the 
intensity of the two behaviors si gnificantly vary over time. These va riations help us identify the 
parameters of CEOM and CPM components (i.e., th e parameters in Equati ons 6, 9 and 11). In the 
next section, we discu ss our empirical results.  
Empirical Results 
We estimate our HMM model using the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) method. 
We maximize the simulated sample log-likelihood to estimate our model parameters. We decide 
on the number of HMM states ba sed on the Bayesian informati on criterion (BIC). In our 
application, we compare the performance of HMMs of up to 4 states (see Table 3). We find that 
the HMM with 3 states provides the best fit to the data as it gives the lowest BIC value. Thus, we 
choose the 3-state HMM for further analysis.  
Insert Table 3 here 
In the following section, we first discuss th e parameter estimates from our proposed hidden 
Markov and Copula Model  of customer purchase and email open  behaviors. Second, we illustrate 
how the firm’s email contact decision would a ffect the customer-firm relationship states. 
Specifically, we discuss how the firm’s email c ontact decision affects customers’ transitions 
among different relationship states. Third, we discuss the distributi on of customers across the three 
customer-firm relationship states. Specifically, we  illustrate the proportion of customers that 

 
 
27 
 belong to different relationship states over time. 
Parameter Estimates 
Table 4 reports the parameter estimates for the 3-state HMM. In order to label the states in 
terms of their purchase and email open behaviors,  we calculate the predicted purchase and email 
open counts (at the average observed levels of cust omer and firm level behavioral variables such 
as LY, LO, EM etc.).  We find those customers in the relationship states 1, 2 and 3 open 0.215, 
2.745 and 2.764 emails (on average) per month, resp ectively. In terms of the purchase behavior, 
we find those customers in the relationship states 1, 2 and 3 make 0.338, 0.148 and 1.219 purchases 
(on average) per month, respecti vely. Based on that calculati on, we label the three latent 
relationship states, which govern the frequency of customers’ email open and purchase in each 
month as “Low Open – Medium Purchase”, “H igh Open – Low Purchase”, and “High Open – 
High Purchase”8. The results suggest that in State 3, the conventional wisdom, i.e., the more 
customers make purchases, the more they open em ails, holds. However, such conventional wisdom 
does not hold in states 1 and 2. Specifically, ema il active customers might be inactive in purchases 
(State 2), and email inactive customers may still be reasonably active in purchases (State 1). This result underlines the importance of  our assumption related to not re stricting the parameters of the 
purchase model along with the email open model (i .e., imposing the following restriction: higher 
the state, higher the email open and higher the purchase levels). 
Insert Table 4 here 
 Table 4 shows that customers in all relationshi p states show a negati ve purchase duration 
dependence. The longer they have not made a purch ase, the less frequently they make purchases. 
                                                            
8 For ease of presentation, we use purchase only labels, i.e. , Low, Medium and High Purchase to refer states 2, 1 and 
3, when we have a discussion related to purchases only . We use the full labels Low Open – Medium Purchase, High 
Open – Low Purchase and High Open – High Purchase to refe r states 1, 2 and 3, when we have a discussion related 
to both purchase and email open behaviors. 

 
 
28 
 The effect is strongest for the Low Purchase customers (-2.235), and it is the weakest for the High 
Purchase customers (-1.294). Similarly, customers also show a negative duration dependence for 
the email open behavior (-0.637), i.e. , the longer they have not opened an email, the less frequently 
they open emails. The results suggest that cust omers making purchases (opening emails) in the 
previous month increases (decreases) the transiti on probability to the High Open – High Purchase 
state. The results also suggest th at, across all relationship states, the number of emails sent by the 
firm initially increases, but then decreases (inver se U-shape) the short-term purchase count. In 
other words, the email contact ha s a nonlinear effect on the purchase  count. In addition, the peak-
point of the inverse U-shaped curve varies acro ss different relationship states, i.e., customers 
respond in diverse ways to email contacts dependi ng on their relationship state. This implies that 
there are different optimal numbers of emails to  send to maximize the short-term purchase count 
across the three relationship states.  Results suggest that two out of the five e ndogeneity correction parame ters are significant. 
In other words, it is important to control for th e endogeneity of EM to be able to recover the short- 
and long-term eff ects correctly of EM in customers’ purchase beha viors and transitions among the 
relationship states. We also find significant heterogeneity in both the estimates of intercepts and 
the response coefficients of the CEOM a nd CPM components of our proposed model.  
Transition Probability Matrix 
The transition matrix from the HMM model s hows how customers evolve across different 
relationship states. We calculate the transitio n probabilities of a “typical” customer using 
Equations (1-4). We vary the number of emails rece ived in the previous pe riod and check the effect 
of email contacts on the stat e transitions (see Table 5). 
Insert Table 5 here 

 
 
29 
 When there is no email contact, the customer s from Medium Purchase and Low Purchase 
states do not tend to move, while those from High Purchase state tend to move down to a Medium 
Purchase state or stay within the High Purchase state. Table 5 shows that email contact has diverse 
effects on the transition pr obabilities of the customers who are from different purchase states. For 
example, ten email contacts per month increases  the likelihood that customers from the Low 
Purchase State move up to the Medium Purcha se state (from 4.53% to 21.42%). However, one 
email contact per month only marginally increas es such likelihood to 5.67%. For the customers 
who are from the Medium Purchase state, email c ontact increases their proba bilities of staying in 
the same state. In summary, email contact ha s a positive long-run eff ect on either making 
customers be more engaged with the firm if they were not so or making them stay engaged if they 
have already been so. However, email contact ha s a negative long-run effect on the customers who 
have already been in a good relationship with th e firm. For the customers who are from the High 
Purchase state, excessive email contacts move them down to lower purchase states. While the 
likelihood of them staying in the High Purchase state is 46.62% in the no-email scenario, such 
likelihood decreases significantly to 25.97% in the 10-em ails scenario. This  non-linear dependence 
between the email contacts and the transition pr obabilities among the purchase states motivate us 
for our policy simulation (in the next section) in which we determine the optimal number of emails 
to send to maximize the firm’ lifetime profit per customer. 
 In Figure 4, we plot the average probabilities  of customers residing in the three purchase 
states over time. We calculate the state membership distribution of each customer using the 
filtering approach (Montgomery et al. 2004; Netz er et al. 2008). Since we assume that each 
customer starts from the lowest state, we drop th e first five periods as initialization periods and 
plot the states evolution over the rest of the 33 periods. We find that, on average,  74%, 12% and 

 
 
30 
 14% of customers started in the Medium-, Low- and High-Purc hase states, respectively. Over the 
course of 33 months, the majority of the custom ers remained in the medium purchase state while 
the rest moved up or down to different stat es. In addition to understanding the aggregate 
distribution of customers across th e different relationship states (Figure 4), th e firm might use the 
filtering approach to understand the state membersh ip distribution at the customer-level. Then, the 
firm might rely on this information to make targ eted email contact decisions. We illustrate this 
idea in our policy simulation section next.  
Insert Figure 4 here 
Optimal Email Marketing 
 The optimal marketing contact strategy is th e focus of several earlier studies (e.g., Khan, 
Lewis, and Singh 2009; Kumar et  al. 2011; Li, Sun and Montgom ery 2013). In this study, since 
we find that sending more emails is not necessar ily good for the firm to encourage its customers 
to make more purchases, determ ining the optimal number of ema ils might provide substantive 
profit gains for the firm. Therefore,  our objective in this section is to provide a DSS that managers 
can rely on to maximize the long-ru n firm profit by sending the right  number of emails to their 
customers over time.  
In this setting, at any given time t, the firm has to make the decision of how many emails 
to send. Given our estimated customer response f unction, the email contact decision has both short- 
and long-term implications on the customer behavi or. Short-term effect derives from the direct 
effect of emails on customer purch ase and email open behaviors at time t (see Equations 5 and 11). 
Long-term effect comes from two sources: (1) cu stomers’ purchase and email open behaviors at 
time t affect the evolution of custom er relationship state from time t to t+1 (see Equation 3); (2) 
the email contacts at time t influence the relationship state transition from time t to t+1 (see 

 
 
31 
 Equation 3). Due to these long-term effects, dete rmining the optimal number of emails to send by 
the firm requires us to solve a dynamic programming problem.   From the retailer’s perspective, the variable of interest is the number of times a customer purchases per month from the store. Under the as sumptions of constant purchase amount per each 
purchase transaction and fixed gross margin for the retailer
9, the purchase count is directly 
translated into the firm’s profit (per custom er and per transaction). For the firm’s dynamic 
optimization problem, the payoff relevant state variab les are: (1) the probabilities that the customer 
exists in each of the customer-firm relationship states ( ݌ଵ௧,݌ଶ௧,݌ଷ௧ൌ1െ݌ ଵ௧െ݌ଶ௧), (2) the time 
since last purchase ( ܻܮ ,)and (3) the time since last email open ( ܱܮ .)Therefore, the state vector at 
time t becomes ܵ௧ൌሺ݌ଵ௧,݌ଶ௧,ܻܮ௧,ܱܮ௧ሻ. Following Kumar et al. (2011) , we assume the timing of 
the email contact decisions as follow s. At the beginning of each month t, the firm predicts the 
probability that the customer exists in each of the three relationship states, ݌ଵ௧, ݌ଶ௧ and ݌ଷ௧ሺൌ 1െ
݌ଵ௧െ݌ଶ௧ሻ. Next, based on the predicted ݌ଵ௧, ݌ଶ௧ and ݌ଷ௧,	as well as ܻܮ௧ and ܱܮ௧, the firm decides 
how many emails to send to the customer. We us e a multinomial logit share function to capture 
the state membership probabilities ሺ݌ଵ௧, ݌ଶ௧ and ݌ଷ௧ሻ	and relate them to two parameters ߱ଵ௧ and 
߱ଶ௧ as follows: 
 ݌ଵ௧ൌexpሺ߱ଵ௧ሻ
1൅expሺ߱ଵ௧ሻ൅expሺ߱ଶ௧ሻ
݌ଶ௧ൌexpሺ߱ଶ௧ሻ
1൅expሺ߱ଵ௧ሻ൅expሺ߱ଶ௧ሻ
݌ଷ௧ൌ1െ݌ ଵ௧െ݌ଶ௧ (16)   
                                                            
9 For confidentiality reasons, customer-level purchase amount is not observed in our dataset. However, based on our 
communication with the managers of the firm, we are advi sed that the average purchase amount for each customer 
transaction is around $80-$110. We are also advised that the average profit margin is around 18-22% across different 
product categories. Thus, in our profit and lifetime value calculations, we assume an average purchase amount of $100 
per customer, per transaction; and 20% profit margin for each customer purcha se occasion. This assumption yields 
$20 net profit per customer at each purchase occasion. 

 
 
32 
  Let ܵ௧ൌሺ݌ଵ௧,݌ଶ௧,ܻܮ௧,ܱܮ௧ሻ denote the state vector at time t. Time from last purchase and 
open states, ܻܮ௧ and ܱܮ௧, evolve based on whether the customer  makes purchases and opens emails 
at time t. If the customer makes purchases at time t, the corresponding state ܻܮ௧ାଵ becomes 1, and 
if he or she doesn’t make any purchases at time t, ܻܮ௧ାଵ becomes ܻܮ௧൅1. Similarly, if the 
customer opens emails at time t, the corresponding state ܱܮ௧ାଵ becomes 1, and if he or she doesn’t 
open any emails, ܱܮ௧ାଵ becomes ܱܮ௧൅1. Since the purchase and email open processes of 
customers are modeled with ZINBD and BD, th e time from last purchase and open states, ܻܮ௧ and 
ܱܮ௧, evolves in a stochast ic manner as follows 
ܻܮ௧ାଵൌ൜1,				 ݎ݄ܲݐ݅ݓ ሺܻ௜௧൐0ሻ
ܻܮ௧൅1, ݎ݄ܲݐ݅ݓ ሺܻ௜௧ൌ0ሻ 
ܱܮ௧ାଵൌ൜1,																				ݎܲ	݄ݐ݅ݓ ሺܱ௜௧൐0ሻ
ܱܮ௧൅1, ݎ݄ܲݐ݅ݓ ሺܱ௜௧ൌ0ሻ (17)  
The evolution of the fi rst two state variables ݌ଵ,௧ାଵ and ݌ଶ,௧ାଵ conditional on the firm’s 
email contact decision ܯܧ௧ are given as 
݌௦,௧ାଵ|ܯܧ௧ൌݎܲ ሺܻ௜௧൐0 ,ܱ௜௧൐0ሻ෍݌௞௧ݍ௧ାଵ,௞→௦ௌ
௞ୀଵሺ1,1,ܯܧ ௧ሻ
൅ݎܲሺܻ௜௧ൌ0 ,ܱ௜௧൐0 	ሻ෍݌௞௧ݍ௧ାଵ,௞→௦ௌ
௞ୀଵሺ0,1,ܯܧ ௧ሻ
൅ݎܲሺܻ௜௧൐0 ,ܱ௜௧ൌ0 	ሻ෍݌௞௧ݍ௧ାଵ,௞→௦ௌ
௞ୀଵሺ1,0,ܯܧ ௧ሻ
൅ݎܲሺܻ௜௧ൌ0 ,ܱ௜௧ൌ0ሻ෍݌௞௧ݍ௧ାଵ,௞→௦ௌ
௞ୀଵሺ0,0,ܯܧ ௧ሻ (18)
 where ݍ௧ାଵ,௞→௦ሺܫሾܻ௧൐0 ሿ ,ܫሾ ܱ ௧൐0 ሿ ,ܯܧ ௧ሻ is the transition function from Equation 4 which is 
used to calculate the probability of  transitioning customers from state ݇ at time t to s at time t+1 

 
 
33 
 conditional on email contacts, purchase and email open indicators at time t.  
 At each time t conditional on the state vector ܵ௧, the objective of the firm is to determine 
the optimal number of email contacts to maximize the discounted sum of expected future profits. 
Under some regularity conditions this objective can be written in  the following Bellman equation. 
 ܸሺܵ௧ሻൌሼߨሺܯܧ௧,ܵ௧ሻ൅ܸܧߩሺܵ ௧ାଵ|ܵ௧,ܯܧ௧ሻሽாெ೟௠௔௫ (19)  
where ߩ is the discount factor, ߨሺ.ሻ is the per period profit and the ex pectation is over all the future 
states and actions of the firm. 
In order to solve this dynamic optimization problem, we discretize the state space with 10 
levels for each state dimension 	݌ଵ௧,݌ଶ௧, ܻܮ௧ and ܱܮ௧ yielding 10,000 state co mbinations. We use 
the value iteration algorithm (Rus t 1987) to find the optimal mappings of the firm’s email contacts 
to our chosen state combinations. Due to the disc retization of the first two state dimensions, the 
value functions for the other points in the stat e space are computed via interpolation (Keane and 
Wolpin 1994). After we cal culate the vector of the optimal mapping of em ail contacts (through the 
value iteration algorithm), we fit a multinomial logit model (MNL)10 to predict optimal email 
contacts as a flexible function of the chosen state space. Next, we use this fitted MNL policy function to predict the optimal num ber of emails to send for any state combinations out of the 
chosen state space.   
Based on the optimal mapping of email contacts to  states from the valu e iteration algorithm, 
we find that the optimal email contact number range s from 5 to 14. We see a lot of heterogeneity 
in the ranges of optimal number of emails sent  based on customers’ re lationship states. For 
instance, if the firm has a belief that with more than 30% probabil ity that the customer is in the 
                                                            
10 The choice of the MNL functional form for the policy function is because the optimal mapping of the email contacts 
takes discrete and finite number of values (ranging between 5 and 14 emails to send as discussed in the next paragraph). 

 
 
34 
 High Purchase state, the optimal number of ema ils to send ranges between 5 and 7 (based on the 
value of the remaining state combinations). If the firm’s belief becomes such that the customer is 
in the Medium Purchase state with more than 30 % probability, then the optimal number of emails 
to send ranges between 6 and 10. If the firm has a strong belie f (more than 90% probability) that 
the customer is in Low Purchase state, the optim al number of emails to send ranges be tween 12 to 
14 emails. Whereas, if the opposite is the case, i.e., the firm has a strong belief that the customer 
is not in the Low Purchase state, the optimal nu mber of emails to send ranges between 5 and 7.  
This heterogeneity in the optimal number of em ails to send suggests that the firm should 
target different customers (by sending different  number of emails) based on their observed 
behaviors ( LY and LO) and its belief about their relationshi p states. To illustrate how the firm 
might use our DSS to target its customers through email marketing, we randomly pick two customers from our database. We then calculate  their HMM state membership probabilities over 
time through the filtering approach, and use our optim al policy function to set the number of email 
contacts (based on their observed LY and LO levels in the data). We plot the optimal number of 
email contacts over time for these two customers in Figure 5. As can be seen in Figure 5, the 
optimal number of emails to send varies significan tly not only across these two customers, but also 
within the same customer over time. This exercise  suggests that our propos ed DSS can easily be 
used as an actionable management tool by th e firm to dynamically manage its email contact 
decisions in a profitable manner.  
Insert Figure 5 here 
Next, we use our optimal policy function to s imulate the firm’s email contact decisions 
along with the customer purchase and email open  responses over a long-time horizon for three 
representative customers in Low, Medium and High Purchase states, respectively. This forward-

 
 
35 
 simulation exercise helps us understand the CLV (customer lifetime value) of customers differ 
across three purchase states. Base d on our assumptions (see Footnot e 9), we find that CLVs of 
customers in Low, Medium and High Purcha se states as $1,333, $1,411, and $1,465, respectively. 
This exercise also reveals that, in the steady-stat e, the optimal number of emails to send to each 
customer becomes 7 emails per month. In addi tion, the discounted sum of  lifetime purchase and 
email open counts become 73 and 118 per customer, respectively. 
Lastly, we conduct a what-if si mulation study to measure how much profit the firm would 
leave on the table if it deviates from the reco vered optimal email policy function (see Figure 6). 
We use the steady-state distribution as the startin g state combinations and test the alternative 
scenarios in which the firm deviates from sendi ng the optimal number of 7 emails. We test the 
scenarios where the firm sends 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, and 10 emails instead of 7. Figure 6 shows that sending 
sub-optimal number of emails might cause the fi rm to lose significant amount of profit. For 
instance, sending 4 (10) emails instead of the optimal level of 7 emails causes the firm to lose 32% 
(16%) of its lifetime profit per cu stomer. This result suggests that  sending the right number of 
emails is highly critical for the profitabil ity of the firm’s email marketing program. 
Insert Figure 6 here 
Robustness Checks 
 To check whether our model and findings are robust to alternative model specifications, 
we conduct four sets of  robustness checks:  
1) Using alternative distributions to model the conditional purchase counts, 
2) Using different Copula functions to model th e correlation between customers’ purchase and 
email open behaviors,  3) Imposing HMM identification restriction on the CPM, and 

 
 
36 
 4) Including holiday dummies as additional control variables in the CPM model. 
 As our first robustness check, we estimate th ree alternative model sp ecifications where the 
conditional purchase count is assumed to be dist ributed as Poisson (PD), Zero-Inflated Poisson 
(ZINPD), and Negative Binomial (NBD), respectivel y. We find that the estimates from these three 
alternative specifications look qualitatively similar to our CPM with ZINBD specification. 
However, based on the BIC criteria, we dete rmine that our proposed ZINBD specification 
outperforms the alternative models ( BIC୞୍୒୆ୈൌ 30,658.11	,BIC ୔ୈൌ 33,440.23  ,BIC୞୍୒୔ୈൌ
32,201.11	,BIC ୒୆ୈൌ 30,994.36	 ). Therefore, we assume th e conditional purch ase count is 
distributed by ZINBD. 
 As our second robustness check, we estimat e two alternative model specifications. 
Specifically, we estimate the alternative models  with Clayton (1978) and Gumbel (1960) Copula 
functions, which have been widely used in the statistics literatur e. Although, all three 
specifications yield qualitatively very similar estimates, based on the BIC criteria, we find that the 
Frank Copula (BIC = 30,658.11) sl ightly outperforms Clayt on (BIC = 30,676.25) and Gumbel 
(BIC = 30,682.59) Copula specifications. Therefore,  we use Frank Copula as our proposed Copula 
specification, and use the Frank Copula spec ification in the rest of our analysis.    
 For identification purpose, we could have imposed HMM restrictions on the CPM instead 
of the CEOM. However, the former restriction requires us to impose 6*( NS-1) restrictions, 
including NS-1 intercepts and NS-1 response coefficients in the ߮௜௧ component, and NS-1 
intercepts and 3*( NS-1) response coefficients in the ߣ௜௧ component, while the latter one only 
requires 2*( NS-1) restrictions ( NS-1 intercepts and NS-1 response coefficients in the ݌௜௧ 
component). Due to this, we prefer to impose rest rictions on the CEOM rather than the CPM. As 
our third robustness check, we estimate the alternative specification in which the identification 

 
 
37 
 restriction is imposed on the c onditional purchase model. Based on the BIC criteria, our proposed 
model (BIC = 30658.11) outperforms that alternative specificatio n (BIC = 31308.9). Therefore, 
we use our proposed model with HMM restrictions on CEOM as our main model in the rest of the 
analysis.  Finally, as our last robustness check, we in corporate the holiday dummies into our CPM 
as additional control variables. Essentially, cust omers might be more ac tive in their purchase 
activities during the holidays. Since our data is at the monthly level, we define the months 
corresponding to Memorial Day, Fourth of Ju ly, Labor Day, Thanksgi ving and Christmas as 
holiday months, and dummy coded this holiday variable. From the comparison of our proposed 
model and the model with holiday dummies, we fi nd that 1) all parameters look qualitatively very 
similar under both specifications; 2) coefficien ts for the holiday dummies are statistically 
insignificant; and 3) based on the BIC criteria our proposed m odel slightly outperforms the 
alternative model (30658.11 versus 30661.85). As a re sult, we use our proposed model without 
holiday dummies as our main mode l in the rest of the analysis. We discuss our empirical findings 
next. 
Conclusions, Limitation s and Future Research 
The email marketing programs are used extensively in various industries to engage with 
customers. The general industry practice in meas uring the effectiveness of an email-marketing 
program is to examine customer responsiveness to emails such as email open rate. However, we show that considering only the email open rate  could be misleading. Our empirical study shows 
that some of the very high email openers are the least active ones in their purchase behaviors. In 
addition, our findings show that some email in active customers are rela tively active in their 
purchase behaviors. Thus, if firms solely focus on the email open rate to allocate its resources, they 

 
 
38 
 might potentially overlook a pool of customers w ho are inactive in responding to emails but are 
relatively active in purchases. 
To the best of our knowledge, substantively, this  is the first empirical study that models the 
customer’s email open and purchase behaviors join tly. In addition, methodol ogically, this is the 
first study that combines the hi dden Markov and Copula models in  a unified framework. In our 
HMM specification, we model the latent customer-f irm relationship states that govern customers’ 
both purchase activeness and email responsiveness. In our Copula specificat ion, we use a Frank 
Copula to correlate the customer’s email open and purchase behaviors. 
Note that, the purpose of this study is not dive rting firms’ attention from email open rate. 
This study shows that, on average, there is a positive correlati on between email open and purchase 
behaviors. Instead, we recommend firms to look at  customers’ purchase behaviors in addition to 
customers’ response rates to emails. If the goal is to maximize the long-term profitability, firms 
should be informed about the optimal level of ema il contacts they should make to their customers. 
Along these lines, we calculate the optimal email marketing contact policy by solving the firm’s 
dynamic optimization problem. Eventually, we propos e an implementable fr amework to study an 
important substantive problem that can save firms millions of dollars. 
In our specific application, although we use email open as the non-purchase customer 
behavior, our framework is quite flexible that it is applicable to other customer-level non-purchase 
behaviors. In addition, our DSS is designed to guide the firm about how many emails to send, 
however, other firm-level marketing decisions mi ght also be guided with  the propose d structure 
without significant issues. Furthermore, as more information that might affect the purchase and 
non-purchase behaviors becomes available, one might incorporate that information through 
constructing additional control variables entering purchase and non-purchase models. Among such 

 
 
39 
 variables, the ones, which are relevant for th e firm’s decision in the supply side, might be 
incorporated into the operationa lization of the proposed DSS. This  will allow the firm to target 
different customers at a given time, and the same customers over time differently based on 
additionally observed customer  level characteristics. 
One of the limitations of this study is that we do not observe the content of the emails. 
Therefore, we do not focus on the emailing stra tegy that intends to match with customers’ 
contemporary needs, such as cross- and up sell ing. Previous research has investigated this 
important issue (e.g., Kumar, George and Panc ras 2008; Li, Sun and Wilcox 2005). If the email 
content data is available, future research might not only consider the eff ect of emailing content on 
customers’ response to emails and purchase behavior , but also provide guidan ce to the firm related 
to targeted email marketing based on personali zed customization of the email content.  
Another limitation of this study is that we do not observe the information from the 
competitors. Customers’ lack of response to emails could simply be due to subscribing to many 
email programs from different firms. Each email delivered to the customer’s inbox is a load of 
information. Customers who are not capable of processing the information will be overwhelmed 
and stop responding. If the firm is aware of it s customers’ inbox activit y, incorporat ing this 
information into the study is imperative. However,  due to the sensitivity of such information the 
likelihood that the retailer  can obtain this information is unlik ely. Future studies could consider 
conducting field experiments to understand how compe ting emails affect customers’ reactions to 
the firm’s emails.   

 
 
40 
 REFERENCES 
Ascend2 (2015), “Marketing Technology Strategy Survey Summary Report,” [available at 
http://ascend2.com/home/wp-content/uploads/Mar keting-Technology-Strategy-Survey-Summary-
Report-150813.pdf].  
 
BlueHornet (2013), “One More Time: Email Frequenc y Chief Culprit in Uns ubscribes,” [available 
at http://www.marketingcharts.com/online/one-m ore-time-email-frequency-chief-culprit-in-
unsubscribes-27944/]. 
 
Bonfrer, André and Xavier Drèze (2009), “Real-Time Evaluation of E-mail Campaign 
Performance,” Marketing Science , 28 (2), 251-263. 
 Chittenden, Lisa and Ruth Rettie (2003), “An Ev aluation of E-mail Marketing and Factors 
Affecting Response,” Journal of Targeting, Measuremen t and Analysis for Marketing , 11 (3), 
203-217. 
 Clayton, D. G. (1978), “A Model for Association in  Bivariate Life Tables and Its Application in 
Epidemiological Studies of Familial Te ndency in Chronic Disease Incidence,” Biometrika , 
65 (1), 141-151. 
 Danaher, Peter J. and Michael S. Smith (201 1), “Modeling Multivariate Distributions Using 
Copulas: Applications  in Marketing,” Marketing Science , 30 (1), 4-21. 
 Direct Marketing Association ( UK) Ltd (2015), “National Clie nt Email 2015,” [available at 
http://dma.org.uk/uploads/ckeditor/ National-client-email-2015.pdf]. 
 
Frank, M. J. (1979), “On the Si multaneous Associativity of Fሺx,yሻ  and x൅yെ
Fሺx,yሻ ,”Aequationes Mathematicae , 19, 194-226.  
 
Genest, Christian (1987), “Frank’s Fa mily of Bivariate Distributions,” Biometrika , 74 (3), 549-
555. 
 Glady, Nicolas, Aurélie Lemmens, and Christ ophe Croux (2015), “Unveil ing the Relationship 
between the Transaction Timing, Sp ending and Dropout Behavior of 
Customers,” International Journal of Research in Marketing , 32 (1), 78-93. 
 Godin, Seth (1999), Permission Marketing: Turning Strange rs into Friends and Friends into 
Consumers.  New York: Simon & Schuster. 
 Gumbel, E. J. (1960), “Distributions des Va leurs Extremes en Plusieurs Dimensions,” 
Publications de l’In stitute de Statist´ ıque de l’Universit´e de Paris , 9, 171–173. 
 Keane, Michael P. and Kenneth I. Wolpin (1 994), “The Solution and Estimation of Discrete 
Choice Dynamic Programming Models by Simu lation and Interpolat ion: Monte Carlo 
Evidence,” The Review of Economics and Statistics , 648-672. 

 
 
41 
 Khan, Romana, Michael Lewis, and Vishal Singh (2009), “Dynami c Consumer Management and 
the Value of One-to-One Marketing,” Marketing Science , 28 (6), 1063-1079. 
 Kumar, V., Morris George, and Joseph Pancras (2008), “Cross-buying in Re tailing: Drivers and 
Consequences,” Journal of Retailing , 84 (1), 15-27. 
 Kumar, V., Sriram S., Anita L uo, and Pradeep K. Chintaguta ( 2011), “Assessing the Effect of 
Marketing Investments in a Bu siness Marketing Context,” Marketing Science , 30 (5), 924-
940. 
 Kumar, V., Xi (Alan) Zhang, and Anita Luo (20 14), “Modeling Consumer Op t-In and Opt-Out in 
a Permission-Based Marketing Context,” Journal of Marketing Research , 51 (4), 403-419. 
 Lee, Alan (1999), “Applications: Modelling Rugby League Data vi a Bivariate Nega tive Binomial 
Regression,” Australian & New Zealand Journal of Statistics , 41 (2), 141-152. 
 Li, Shibo, Baohong Sun, and Alan L. Montgomery (2011), “Cross-Selling the Right Product to the 
Right Consumer at the Right Time,” Journal of Marketing Research , 48 (4), 683-770. 
 Li, Shibo, Baohong Sun, and Ronald T. Wilcox (2005), “Cross-selling Sequentially Ordered 
Products: An Application to Consumer Banking Services,” Journal of Marketing Research , 
42 (2), 233-239. 
 Luo, Anita and V. Kumar (2013), “Recovering Hidden Buyer-Seller Relationship States to 
Measure the Return on Marketing Investme nt in Business-to-Business Markets,” Journal of 
Marketing Research , 50 (1), 143-160. 
 
Merisavo, Marko and Mika Raulas (2004), “The Impact of E-Mail  Marketing on Brand Loyalty,” 
Journal of Product & Brand Management , 13 (7), 498-505. 
 Montgomery, Alan, Shibo Li, Kannan Srinivasan, and John C. Liechty (2004), “Modeling Online 
Browsing and Path Analysis using Clickstream Data,” Marketing Science , 23 (4), 579-595. 
 Montoya, Ricardo, Oded Netzer, and Kamel Jedidi (2010), “Dynamic Allocation of 
Pharmaceutical Detailing and Sampling for Long-Term Profitability,” Marketing Science , 29 
(5), 909-924. 
 Netzer, Oded, James M. Lattin, and V. Srinivas an (2008), “A Hidden Markov Model of Consumer 
Relationship Dynamics,” Marketing Science , 27 (2), 185-204. 
 Nikoloulopoulos, Aristidis K. and Dimitris Ka rlis (2010), “Regression in a Copula Model for 
Bivariate Count Data,” Journal of Applied Statistics , 37 (9), 1555-1568.  
 Park, Sungho and Sachin Gupta (2012), “Hand ling Endogenous Regressors by Joint Estimation 
Using Copulas,” Marketing Science , 31 (4), 567-586. 
 

 
 
42 
 Petrin, A., & Train, K. ( 2010). A control function approach to endogeneity in Consumer  choice 
models. Journal of marketing research , 47(1), 3-13. 
 Return Path (2015), “Frequency Matters: The Keys to Optimizing Email Send Frequency,” 
[available at http:// returnpath.com/wp-content/uploa ds/2015/06/RP-Frequency-Report-
FINAL.pdf]. 
 Rust, John (1987), “Optimal Replacement of GMC Bu s Engines: An Empirical Model of Harold 
Zurcher,” Econometrica: Journal of  the Econometric Society , 999-1033. 
 Sahni, Navdeep, Dan Zou, and Pradeep K. Chin tagunta (2016), “Do Targeted Discount Offers 
Serve as Advertising? Evidence from 70 Field Experiments,” Management Science, 
forthcoming. 
 Schweidel, David A., Young-Hoon Park, and Zainab Jamal (2014) , “A Multiac tivity Latent 
Attrition Model for Consumer Base Analysis,” Marketing Science , 33 (2), 273-286. 
 Schweidel, David A., and Geor ge Knox (2013), “Incorporating Di rect Marketing Activity into 
Latent Attrition Models,” Marketing Science , 32 (3), 471-487. 
 Sklar, A. (1959), “Fonctions de répartition à n dimensions et leurs marges,” Publications de 
l’Institut de Statistique de L’Université de Paris , 8, 229–231. 
 Stephen, Andrew T., and Jeff Galak (2012), “The E ffects of Traditional and Social Earned Media 
on Sales: A Study of a Micr olending Marketplace,” Journal of Marketing Research , 49 (5), 
624-639. 
 
Tezinde, Tito, Brett Smith, and Jamie Murphy ( 2002), “Getting Permission: Exploring Factors 
Affecting Permission Marketing,” Journal of Intera ctive Marketing , 16 (4), 28-39. 
 Trivedi, Pravin K. and David M. Zimmer  (2005), “Copula Modeling: An Introduction for 
Practitioners,” Foundations Trends Econometrics , 1 (1), 1-111. 
 
Villas-Boas, J. M., & Winer, R. S. (1999). Endogeneity in brand choice models. Management 
Science , 45(10), 1324-1338. 
 
Xue‐Kun Song, Peter (2000), “Multivariate Disper sion Models Generated from Gaussian 
Copula,” Scandinavian Journal of Statistics , 27 (2): 305-320. 
  

 
 
43 
 Figure 1: Purchase and Email Open Count of Three Selected Customers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  0246810
13579 1 1 1 3 1 5 1 7 1 9 2 1 2 3 2 5 2 7 2 9 3 1 3 3 3 5 3 7 3 9Montly Count
Monthspurchase count
email‐open count
0246810
1 3 5 7 9 1 11 31 51 71 92 12 32 52 72 93 13 33 53 73 9Monthly Count
Monthspurchase count
email‐open count
0246810
1 3 5 7 9 1 11 31 51 71 92 12 32 52 72 93 13 33 53 73 9Monthly Count
Monthspurchase count
email‐open countCustome r1
Customer 2
Customer 3

 
 
44 
 Figure 2: Distributions of Pu rchase and Email Open Count Percentage Distribution of Purchase Count 
 
Purchase Count 
 Percentage Distribution of Email Open Count 
Email Open Count 
 
  


 
 
45 
 Figure 3: Hidden Markov and Copula Model of Customer Purchase and Email Open 
Behaviors 
 
Figure 4: Distribution of Custom ers’ State Membership over Time  
 
Note: On average, Low, Medium and High Purchase customers make 0.148, 
0.338 and 1.219 purchases per month, respectively. 
 
 
 
  


 
 
46 
 Figure 5: Within Customer Opti mal Email Contacts Over Time 
  
 
 
 
Figure 6: Steady-State CLV versus Number of Email Contacts 
 5 1 01 52 02 53 03 56 8 10 12
MonthsOptimal Number of Emails to SendCustomer 1
Customer 2
456789 1 01000 1100 1200 1300 1400
Number of Email ContactsSteady-State Consumer Lifetime Value (in Dollars)

 
 
47 
 Table 1: Comparison of Existing Studies  
Studies Type of 
Data Type of Models Modeling Customer 
Relationship over 
Purchase Modeling Customer 
Relationship over 
Multiple Decisions Providing 
a DSS Dynamics 
Component Marginal Distribution 
Component 
Netzer et al. (2008) Donation HMM Logit Yes No No 
Montoya et al. (2010) Prescription HMM Binomial Yes  No Yes 
Kumar et al. (2011) B2B  HMM Multivariate Tobit Yes  No Yes 
Li et al. (2011) Banking HMM Multivariate Probit Yes  No Yes 
Luo and Kumar (2013) B2B  HMM Multivariate Tobit Yes No No 
Schweidel et al. (2014) E-commerce Late nt Changepoint Bivariate Choice Yes  Yes No 
This Study Retailing HMM Copula of Zero-Inflated 
Negative Binomial and 
Binomial Distributions Yes Yes Yes 
 
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics & Correlation Matrix11 
 Descriptive Statistics   Correlation Matrix  
 Mean Std. Dev. Lower 5% Upper 95%  Number of 
Purchases Number of 
Emails Sent Number of 
Emails Opened 
Number of Purchases (per month, per customer) 0.69 1.63 0 4  1   
Number of Emails Sent (per month, pe r customer) 6.90 4.91 0 15  0.013 1  
Number of Emails Opened (per month, per customer)  1.64 3.16 0 10  0.050 0.425 1 
Time from Last Purchase (in months) 6.33 7.16 1 22     Time from Last Email Open (in months) 5.45 7.23 1 22.05     
Indicator of Open (per month, per customer) 0.40 0.49 0 1     
Indicator of Purchase (per month, per customer) 0.29 0.45 0 1     
 
Table 3: Selecting the Number of States  
HMM States Log-Likelihood BIC 
1 -17956.41 36064.73 
2 -17152.83 34582.67 
3 -15119.06 30658.11 4 -15098.16 30777.15 
                                                            
11 The monthly descriptive statistics are calculated from our data consisting N=200 randomly chosen customers (from the retailer’s  customer database) who are 
observed for a period of T=39 months.  

48 
 Table 4: Estimation Results for the 3-State Hidden Markov Model  
  Estimates Standard Error 
Transition Matrix   
Intercept for transition (State 1 to 2) -2.647*** 0.315 
Intercept for transition (State 1 to 3) -1.432*** 0.248 
Intercept for transition (State 2 to 2) 2.829*** 0.352 
Intercept for transition (State 2 to 3) -3.815 4.554 Intercept for transition (State 3 to 2) -2.398
* 0.953 
Intercept for transition (State 3 to 3) 0.061 0.274 I[Lagged Purchase > 0] on transition to State 2 0.173 0.218 I[Lagged Purchase > 0] on transition to State 3 0.363
* 0.150 
I[Lagged Open > 0] on transition to State 2 0.422 0.376 I[Lagged Open > 0] on transition to State 3 -0.486
* 0.216 
Lag Email Sent on transition to State 2 -0.245** 0.088 
Lag Email Sent on transition to State 3 -0.110 0.064 Lag Email Sent Square on transition to State 2 0.007 0.005 Lag Email Sent Square on transition to State 3 0.001 0.004 Lag Email Sent Residual on transition to State 2 0.144
*** 0.038 
Lag Email Sent Residual on transition to State 3 0.003 0.033 
Email Open Frequency (Binomial)   
Intercept State 1 -2.367*** 0.065 
Intercept (additional State 2, exp) 1.105*** 0.016 
Intercept (additional State 3, exp) -4.450*** 0.969 
Time since last open (log) -0.637*** 0.067 
Variance for the intercept 1.817*** 0.064 
Variance for Time since last open 0.388*** 0.062 
Conditional Purchase Frequency (ZINBD)   
Purchase Count Equation   
Intercept (State 1) -0.716*** 0.105 
Intercept (State 2) -2.951*** 0.312 
Intercept (State 3) -0.413 0.317 Email Sent (State 1) 0.196
*** 0.031 
Email Sent (State 2) 0.470*** 0.011 
Email Sent (State 3) 0.321*** 0.091 
Email Sent Square (State 1) -0.013*** 0.002 
Email Sent Square (State 2) -0.020*** 0.001 
Email Sent Square (State 3) -0.027*** 0.007 
Email Sent Residual (State 1) -0.039* 0.016 
Email Sent Residual (State 2) 0.049 0.037 Email Sent Residual (State 3) -0.002 0.036 Variance for the intercept 1.021
*** 0.049 
Variance for Email Sent 0.020* 0.009 

 
 
49 
 Variance for Email Sent Square 0.000 0.001 
Dispersion, exp 0.655*** 0.071 
Excess of Zeros Equation   
Intercept (State 1) 2.135*** 0.066 
Intercept (State 2) 3.203*** 0.710 
Intercept (State 3) 3.447*** 0.761 
Time since last purchase (State 1) (log) -1.528*** 0.073 
Time since last purchase (State 2) (log) -2.235*** 0.391 
Time since last purchase (State 3) (log) -1.294*** 0.338 
Variance for the intercept 2.008*** 0.208 
Variance for Time since last purchase 0.168 0.091 
Correlation (Email Open and Purchase)   
Frank Copula correlation coefficient  0.324*** 0.067 
Likelihood -15119.06  
BIC 30658.11  
 
Legends: * p-value<0.05, ** p-value<0.01, *** p-value<0.001 
 
Labels of the Markov states – State 1: Low Open - Medium Purchase, State 2: High Open - Low Purchase, State 3: High Open - High Purchase  
 
  
Table 5 Transition Probability Matrix of the HMM 
  To Low Purchase To Medium Purchase To High Purchase 
From Low Purchase 
Without Email Contact 95.38% 4.53% 0.09% 
With One Email Contact 94.22% 5.67% 0.10% 
With Five Email Contacts 87.93% 11.92% 0.14% 
With Ten Email Contacts 78.42% 21.42% 0.16% 
From Medium Purchase 
Without Email Contact 6.75% 76.53% 16.72% 
With One Email Contact 5.49% 79.02% 15.48% 
With Five Email Contacts 2.66% 86.20% 11.14% 
With Ten Email Contacts 1.40% 91.27% 7.33% 
From High Purchase 
Without Email Contact 5.43% 47.95% 46.62% 
With One Email Contact 4.55% 50.99% 44.46% 
With Five Email Contacts 2.45% 61.93% 35.62% 
With Ten Email Contacts 1.43% 72.60% 25.97% 
 

