1 
 Dynamic Pricing in a Distribution Channel in the Presence of Switching Costs 
 
 
 
 
Koray Cosguner † 
Assistant Professor of Marketing, Georgia State University 
 
 
Tat Chan 
Associate Professor of Marketing, W ashington University in St. Louis 
 
 
P.B. (Seethu) Seetharaman 
W. Patrick McGinnis Professor of Marketi ng, Washington University in St. Louis 
 
 
   
March 29, 2016   
                                                 
† Corresponding Author: Koray Cosguner, email: kcosguner@gsu.edu ; Ph: 404-413-7697. This article is based on the first author’s doctoral 
dissertation, written at Olin Business School  under the supervision of the second and th ird authors. The authors thank seminar participants at 
Olin, Georgia State, Yale, Rice, Alberta, Johns Hopkins, Emory, Carnegie Mellon, Koc, Sabanci, HEC, and Ozyegin for their comme nts and 
feedback on earlier versions of this article. 
 

2 
 Dynamic Pricing in a Distribution Channel in the Presence of Switching Costs 
 
Abstract 
 
 We advance the literature on dynamic oligopoly pr icing models in the presence of switching costs 
by additionally modeling the strategic pricing role of the retailer within the dist ribution channel. In doing 
this, we study the relative dynamic pricing implicat ions of how current retail and wholesale prices for a 
brand must optimally take into account, respectively,  past versus future demand for the brand. Using 
scanner data from the cola market, we find that while the retailer exploits the be nefit of inertial demand 
by appropriately increasing the retail profit margin, the cost of investing is borne entirely by the manufacturers. We use simulation studies to show how the retailer will lose its ability to leverage the 
benefits of inertial demand as consumers become more pr ice sensitive. We also show that when inertia of 
the more price sensitive customer segment increases,  the aggregate welfare of consumers, retailer and 
manufacturers may all increase.
  
 
 
Keywords : Dynamic Pricing, Switching Costs, Distribution Channel, Structural Econometric Models. 
 
  

3 
 Introduction 
Dynamic pricing incentives among firms arise in  product markets characterized by switching 
costs that are due to inertia  in consumers’ brand choices over time . Inertia refers to the phenomenon of 
consumers often repeat-purchasing the same brand on successive purchase occasions, leading to the market-level demand for a brand being positively co rrelated over time. A pricing implication of such 
inertia in demand, for example, is that reducing th e price of Coke in the current week will increase the 
demand for Coke not only in the current week but al so in the subsequent weeks when the price reduction 
on Coke has been retracted. Thus, Coke faces a trade-off between charging a low price to attract new 
customers and locking them for future purchases (“inv est”), and charging a higher price to extract higher 
profits from its already locked-in customers (“harvest ”). The optimal pricing strategy for Coke then 
depends on (1) the actual extent of inertia in cons umers’ brand choices in the cola market, as well as (2) 
the pricing strategies of competing cola manufacturers (such as Pepsi). Furthermore, since Coke sells its 
products through common, independent retailers, the pricing strategy of Coke also depends on (3) the 
pricing strategies of re tailers in determining retail  prices of Coke (and Pepsi) for end consumers, given 
that Coke (or Pepsi) sets wholesale  prices for the retailer. Since each independent retailer also faces 
similar trade-offs between charging a low retail price on Coke (or Pepsi) to attract customers to that brand 
and locking them in to that brand, versus chargi ng a higher retail price on Coke (or Pepsi) to extract 
higher retail profits from that brand’s already locked -in customers, this creates interesting dynamic 
interactions between the pricing strate gies of manufacturer firms and retailers. 
Previous studies of pricing in the distribution channel are based on myopic pricing policies (see, 
for example, McGuire and Staelin 1983, Iyer 1998, Sudhir 2001, Desai, Koenigsberg and Purohit 2004, 
Dukes, Gal-Or and Srinivasan 2006 etc.). Although a few studies indeed account for the dynamic effects 
of consumer switching costs on price competition am ong manufacturers (see, for example, Wernerfelt 
1991, Beggs and Klemperer 1992 etc.), they ignore the st rategic role of the retailer. Such an omission is 
not innocuous because a retailer with a category ma nagement objective, unlike a manufacturer with a 
brand management objective, may have little to no incentiv e to lock in customers to a particular brand by 

4 
 lowering its current retail price. Knowing that the retailer may not cooperate in passing through lowered 
wholesale prices on their brands to end consumers, th erefore, may increase the harvesting (i.e., increasing 
wholesale prices) over investing (i.e., decreasing wholesale prices) incentives for manufacturers. Our 
objective in this research is to model the harvest ing versus investing pric ing incentives of not only 
competing manufacturers, but also the retailer, in the presence of inertial demand. 
We use a full equilibrium approach that simu ltaneously accounts for the dynamic incentives of 
competing manufacturers in setting wholesale prices, as well as the dynamic incentives of the common 
retailer through whom they sell in de termining retail prices, for the diffe rent brands in the category. For 
this purpose, we propose a structural econometric model of dynamic pricing decisions of manufacturers and a common retailer in the presence of inertia in c onsumers’ brand choices. To recover parameters from 
the model, our first step is estimating a consumer-level brand choice model that includes the effects of 
inertia. We use a control function approach (Petrin a nd Train 2010, the idea of which is similar to the 
approach in Villas-Boas and Winer 1999) to solve the price endogeneity problem. Our second step is 
estimating the structural econometric pricing mode l that accounts for the dynamic interactions both 
among manufacturers as well as between each manufacturer  and the retailer. We use a technique similar 
to the Euler equation approach (see, for example, Hall 1979 and Hansen and Singleton 1982) while take 
account of the competitive interactions. This approach  was first proposed by Berry and Pakes (2000). We 
differ from their method by using a polynomial approxi mation for the optimal pricing strategy of every 
firm and, based on the approximation, forward simu lating future profits to obtain the optimality 
conditions for the price decisions. We further impose a penalty function in the model estimation to ensure 
that the polynomial price functions closely approxim ate the optimal price decisions predicted by the 
model.  
 We apply the model to study the cola category in  a local market over a period of two years. We 
first use a scanner panel data  on the household brand choice to estimate a two-segment brand choice 
model. Results show that the cola category is charact erized by significant inertia in demand. We then use 
a retail tracking data  on store-level prices of cola brands of the same local market to estimate the pricing 

5 
 model. Based on the estimation results, we use counte rfactuals to decompose the harvesting and investing 
incentives of each channel member. We find that, whil e manufacturers have both harvesting and investing 
incentives, the retailer always only harvests. In ot her words, the retailer effectively free rides on the 
manufacturers’ efforts by taking a lion’s share of the additional profits that accrue to the channel from the 
existence of inertial demand. This result highlights an  interesting vertical conflict in the distribution 
channel, between manufacturers and the retailer, in th e presence of inertial demand. We also find that the 
less preferred brand is pressured to invest for the fu ture by cutting its current wholesale price. Its profit 
margin, therefore, is reduced when  compared to a market without in ertia, illustrating that asymmetric 
brand preferences can lead to significant differences  among the brands in harvesting versus investing 
incentives.  
Further simulation studies show that the retaile r significantly loses its ability to leverage the 
benefits of inertial demand as consumers become more price sensitive. On the other hand, each 
manufacturer’s harvesting and investing incentives bot h decrease with an increase in consumer price 
sensitivity, yielding a smaller decrease in wholesale pri ces. In another simulation study, we show that 
when inertia of the light user / more price sensitiv e customer segment increases, retail prices of both Coke 
and Pepsi decrease. This is because the retailer is willing to sacrifice profit margin in this case for the 
benefit of expanding market demand.  This ends up increasing the aggregate welfare of all 3 parties – 
consumers, retailer and manufacturers – in the distri bution channel. This finding departs from the usual 
finding in this literature that an increase in switc hing costs hurts consumers by increasing retail prices 
(Viard 2007, Dube et al. 2008). This can have useful managerial implications such as, for example, 
enabling the prediction of how retail prices and prof its of each channel member would change when 
manufacturers change customer brand inertia a nd price sensitivity using marketing activities. 
 
Literature Review  
There are two seminal game-theoretic studi es, namely Beggs and Klemperer (1992) and 
Wernerfelt (1991), that centrally motivate the importa nce of our econometric research from the standpoint 

6 
 of pricing strategies of brand manufacturers. We di scuss these two studies first, and later studies on the 
same issue next. 
Beggs and Klemperer (1992)  derive the normative pricing impli cations of inertial demand in a 
differentiated duopoly using an infinite period game -theoretic framework, which generalizes the two-
period game-theoretic framework of  Klemperer (1987a, b), where new cu stomers arrive and a fraction of 
old consumers leave in each period. Furthermore, in each period, old (locked-in) customers and new 
(uncommitted) customers are intermingled and the two firms cannot discriminate between these groups of 
customers. The authors study whether the firms’ temp tation to exploit their current customer bases would 
lead to higher prices ( harvesting  incentive), or whether the firms’ desire to attract new customers would 
lead to lower prices ( investing  incentive), than in the case of no inertia. The authors show that under a 
wide range of parametric assumptions, both firms – each  with an installed base of existing customers – 
face demand functions that are relatively price inelastic  compared to their counterparts in an otherwise 
identical mature market without inertia. This decr eased price elasticity reduces the price rivalry among 
the firms, leading to higher prices and profits for both  firms. The authors show that inertial demand could 
lead to vigorous price competition in the early grow th stages of a market, as competing firms aggressively 
try to build market shares for their brands. When  the modeling framework allows for rational (i.e., 
“forward-looking”) consumers, the prices of the two firms are shown to beco me less competitive because 
consumers who realize that firms with higher market sh ares will charge higher prices in the future are less 
price elastic than naïve consumers. The authors find th at prices rise as (1) firms discount the future more, 
(2) consumers discount the future less, (3) turnover of consumers decreases, and (4) the rate of growth of 
the market decreases. 
In contrast to the discrete-time, game-theore tic framework adopted by Beggs and Klemperer 
(1992), Wernerfelt (1991) adopts a continuous-time,  game-theoretic framework to study price 
competition between firms in inertial markets. Cons istent with the findings in Beggs and Klemperer 
(1992), Wernerfelt (1991) also derives higher equilibriu m prices for firms, as well as a positive effect of 
the extent of firms’ future discoun ting behavior on equilibrium prices, in  inertial markets. This shows that 

7 
 the equilibrium pricing results are robust to whether the game-theoretic pricing models are solved in 
discrete or continuous time. Using banking and teleco mmunications data, respectively, Kim, Kliger and 
Vale (2003) and Viard (2007) find that the harvesti ng incentive dominates the investing incentive in 
dynamic pricing in the presence of switching costs. 
Unlike Beggs and Klemperer (1992) and Werner felt (1991), who show that the harvesting 
incentive outweighs the investing incentive for manufacturers under a wide range of parametric 
assumptions, Chintagunta and Rao (1996) and Dube, Hit sch and Rossi (2009) find the opposite to be the 
case under some parametric assumptions that are b ased on actual demand estimates. They show that 
myopic pricing strategies of firms that fail to recogni ze the long-run impact of their current prices lead to 
prices that are higher than those implied by dynami c pricing strategies. Doganoglu (2010) obtains the 
same result when the degree of inertia in demand in his model is assumed to be sufficiently low. Villas-
Boas (2004) also derives the same result for the case where inertial demand endogenously arises out of 
consumers learning about how well diffe rent brands fit their preferences, and when the distribution of 
consumer valuations for each produc t is negatively skewed. In sum, with inertial demand, manufacturer 
prices could increase or decrease depending on whether harvesting or investing incentives dominate, 
respectively (see Villas-Boas 2015 for a state-o f-the-art review of this literature). 
All of the models of dynamic pricing discussed above  ignore the strategic role of the retailer in 
the distribution channel. In other words, the pric ing implications of inertial demand are derived for 
manufacturer pricing, tacitly assuming that manufacture rs sell directly to end consumers. However, in 
reality, retail prices for end consumers are set by re tailers while manufacturers only set wholesale prices 
for retailers. The wholesale pricing implications of  switching costs for competing manufacturers may be 
very different from those derived for direct se lling manufacturers in the dynamic pricing literature. 
Explicitly modeling the strategic pricing role of the re tailer is important in this regard. For example, the 
retailer could serve as a “strategic buffer” in terms of cushioning wholesale price competition among 
manufacturers (Sudhir 2001). Two recent studies look at the consequences of inertial demand for 
retailers’ pricing decisions, namely, Che, Sudhir a nd Seetharaman (2007) and Dube, Hitsch, Rossi and 

8 
 Vitorino (2009). However, Dube et al. (2009) deri ve optimal retailer prices, ignoring the role of 
manufacturers and, therefore, treating the retailer’s costs as exogenously specified. Che et al. (2007), on 
the other hand, simultaneously account for the stra tegic role of competing manufacturers in setting 
wholesale prices, while deriving optimal retail prices in  the distribution channel. Furthermore, Che et al. 
(2009) take an econometric, as opposed to a purely game -theoretic, approach in explaining retail pricing 
decisions of retailers. In this sense, the Che et al. ( 2007) study is closely related to this research. However, 
given the computational challenges associated with th e estimation of a structural econometric model of 
pricing in the distribution channel (as will be explaine d in the next paragraph), Che et al. (2007) formulate 
their pricing model for a finite number of decision pe riods only (as opposed to infinite periods). Our study 
relaxes this restrictive assumption and derives the a ppropriate pricing model for the distribution channel 
under the general case of infinite period decision-ma king of manufacturers (as in the game-theoretic 
literature, see, for example, Beggs  and Klemperer (1992) and Wernerfe lt (1991)), as well as the retailer. 
We find from the empirical application that the optimal pricing decisions of the retailer and 
manufacturers, when they consider long-term profits, are significantly different from the case when they 
only consider one or two periods ahead, as in the model of Che et al. (2007). This long-term profit 
approach helps us better understa nd the tension between the harvesting and investing incentives of 
manufacturers and the retailer in driving the observed re tail prices of brands in our data. More generally, 
our approach can be used by manufacturers and retailers in order to correctly assess the long-run 
consequences of alternative pricing strategies of br ands, something that cannot be accomplished using the 
Che et al. (2007) approach.  
Estimating econometric models of dynamic pricing in the distribution channel in the presence of 
inertial demand presents a significant estimation cha llenge, arising when some firm actions (such as 
wholesale prices, as in our case) are unobserved by the researcher. In fact, as we will discuss in detail later, this difficulty renders recently developed eco nometric techniques in the econometrics literature – 
Pakes and McGuire (2001), Bajari, Benk ard and Levin (2007) etc. – inapplicable to our context. We use a 

9 
 new estimation strategy to recover the parameters when some of the agents’ actions are unobserved. We 
apply our structural econometric model of dynamic pric ing in the distribution channel to the cola market. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we present our econometric 
model of inertial demand, as well as the associated estim ation procedure. In the third section, we present 
our structural econometric model of dynamic pricing in  the distribution channel in the presence of inertial 
demand, as well as the associated estimation procedure. Section 4 presents the estimation results from 
applying our proposed structural econometric models  of inertial demand and dynamic distribution channel 
pricing on scanner panel data from the cola market. In Section 5, we discuss the policy implications of our 
estimation results based on a counterfactual simulation.  Section 6 concludes with caveats and directions 
for future research.  
Econometric Model of Demand with Switching Costs 
To develop an econometric model of brand c hoice with the no-purchase option for scanner panel 
data in the cola category, we recognize that the typical household h (h = 1, 2, …, H), which is observed 
over t = 1, 2, …, T
h shopping trips, either buys or does not buy one of J cola brands. On any given 
shopping trip, we observe an outcome variable yht that takes the value j (j = 0, 1, 2, …, J). When yht = 0 it 
means that the household does not purchase in  the cola category during shopping trip t. Further, during 
each shopping trip of a household, we observe the price ( Pjt), display ( Djt), and feature ( Fjt) covariates that 
the household faces, regardless of whether the househol d purchases in the cola category. Our econometric 
approach models the multinomial outcome yht as explained next. 
Let Uhjt denote the (indirect) utility of household h for brand j at shopping trip t. We assume that 
we can express this utility as a function of brand-specific covariates, ( Pjt, Djt, Fjt), as well as the 
household’s lagged brand choice outcome, which represen ts the brand that was most recently purchased 
by the household, also referred to as the household’s state dependence , Sht, as follows. 
     12 3** * * * [ ] ,hjt hj h jt h jt h jt h t h ht jt hjtU P D F Summer I S j             (1) 

10 
 where μhj, j = 1, 2, …, J , is the household’s brand preference, Summer t is an indicator variable that takes 
the value 1 if week t belongs to the summer season, and 0 otherwise, I[A] is the indicator function that 
takes the value of 1 when event A occurs and the value of 0 otherwise. For model parameters, 1h, 2h, 3h 
represent the household sensitivities to marketing mix, γh the seasonality effect, and h the household-
specific inertia parameter.i This utility function suggests that  the switching cost is equal to -h/1h. We 
assume that a demand shock, ξjt, which is common to all households, may exist and correlate with price 
Pjt. The idiosyncratic error εhjt is independent from Pjt and are distributed iid across households, brands, 
and periods. 
Let Uh0t denote the (indirect) utility of household h for the no-purchase option (also called 
“outside good”) 0 at shopping trip t. We assume that we can express this utility as follows. 
00 ,ht htU          ( 2 )  
where the random error h0t is distributed iid across households, brands, and periods. 
The multinomial outcome yht is determined by the principle of maximum utility. We observe yht = 
j when the utility of the jth option to the household exceeds that of the remaining options. This yields the 
following probabilistic model for brand choice, 
     10 Pr Pr max ,..., , .ht hjt h t hJt h tyj U U U U        ( 3 )  
This inertial demand model, which has been used, fo r example, by Seetharaman, Ainslie and Chintagunta 
(1999), Shum (2004), Dube, Hitsch and Rossi  (2010) etc., captures inertia as a first-order  behavioral 
phenomenon, i.e., only the household’ s most (and not the second-most, third-most etc.) recent brand 
choice (i.e., []htIS j) influences its current brand choice proba bilities. Past research in packaged goods 
categories has demonstrated that higher-order lagge d brand choices capture little additional explanatory 
variance beyond the most recent lagged choice outcome, in  terms of explaining current brand choices of 
consumers (see, for example, Kahn, Kalwani and Morrison 1986, Seetharaman 2003 etc.). 
Following the latent class approach of Heckman and Singer (1984), we assume that households 
belong to M segments. This simplifies our empirical objectiv e to estimate the utility parameters for each 

11 
 of M segments (rather than H households), as well as the associ ated segment sizes. This is done by 
maximizing the following sample log-likelihood function.ii 
  11 10ln ln * Pr ,hjt hY TJ HMm
mh t hm tjLy j           (4) 
where m  [0, 1] stands for the size of segment m, and  Prm
htyj is the conditional choice probability 
of household h buying brand j at shopping trip t, given that the household belongs to segment m. The 
probability is derived from equation (3), where the hous ehold-specific parameters in the utility function in 
equation (1) are replaced by segment-specific para meters. Since households usually undertake shopping 
trips at weekly intervals, we will interchangeably use t, for expositional purposes, to  refer to shopping trip 
or week.  
 
Structural Econometric Model of Dynamic Distribution Channel Pricing in the Presence of 
Switching Costs 
To develop a structural econometric model of dist ribution channel pricing in the cola category, 
we recognize that each manufacturer j sets a wholesale price Wjt for a retailer, while the retailer then sets a 
retail price Pjt, for their brand, during each of  t = 1, 2, …, T weeks in the data.iii The retailer is a 
monopolist in a local market. During each week, we obs erve the retail price as an outcome variable but 
not the wholesale price. Our econometric approach models the continuous outcome Pjt as explained next. 
We do this in two steps. We first derive a predictive model of aggregate brand market share, which is an 
aggregation of individual-level brand demand, as deri ved in the previous section. We then embed this 
predictive model of aggregate brand market share w ithin a dynamic pricing game within a distribution 
channel involving competing manufacturers and a common retailer. This game assumes that 
manufacturers engage in Bertrand price competition w ith each other while setting their wholesale prices, 
while the retailer plays the role of a Stackelberg follo wer while setting retail prices for the manufacturers’ 
brands (taking their wholesale prices as given). As in  past empirical work on pricing games, we assume 
that display and feature activities of brands are exog enous to their pricing decisions. Usually display and 

12 
 feature decisions tend to be jointly coordinated across categories. For these reasons, our exogeneity 
assumption may not be unreasonable. 
 
Predictive Model of Aggregate Brand Market Share 
Let m
jtS denote a state variable  that represents the (segment-specific) installed base  for brand j 
during week t. This installed base variable represen ts the number of consumers in segment m, as of week 
t, whose most recent brand choice is brand j. Further, let 12( , ,..., )mm mm
tt t J tSS SS  represent the vector of 
installed base variables across all J brands during week t. The following equation, called the state 
equation , captures the evolution of Sjtm from week t to week t+1. 
  ,1 *P r ( ) * 1 P r ( ) ,JJmm mm m
jt k t t j t t kj kjSS k j S j k       (5) 
where Pr ( )m
tk j stands for the switching probability , for a consumer in segment m, of switching from 
brand k to brand j, during week t, and is given by 
 Pr ( ) Pr y j| [ ] 1 .mm
th t h tkj I Sk        (6) 
where [] 1htIS k  represents that the household’s previous purchased brand is k (and [' ] 0htIS k
for any other brand k’), and Prm is the brand choice probability in equation (3). When λ>0, the above 
equation implies that Pr ( ) Pr ( )mm
ttjj k j   . That is, for a given consumer, the probability of 
choosing a particular brand now is greater if the same  brand had been chosen the previous time than if 
another brand had been chosen the previous time, indicating the inertia in brand choice. Equation (5) 
represents how the installed base of brand  j changes from week  t to week t+1. This happens in two ways: 
one, customers currently in the installed bases of the other brands (m
ktS) switch to the installed base of 
brand j by buying brand j in week t, which happens with probability Pr ( )m
tk j , as shown in equation 
(6); two, customers currently in the installed base of brand j (m
jtS) continue being in the installed base of 

13 
 brand  j, by either repeat-purchasing brand j, or choosing the no-purchase option, in week t, with the 
collective probability of the two events being 1P r ( )Jm
t kjjk . 
Given the state equation (5), aggregate market share for brand j in week t, MS jt, is given by 
1*,Mm
jtm j t mMSM S         ( 7 ) 
where MS jtm stands for segment-level market share for brand j in week t in segment m, and is given by 
1*Pr ( ) .Jmm m
jt kt t kMSS k j       ( 8 ) 
This completes our discussion of the predictive model of aggregate brand market share. In summary, 
aggregate market share for brand j in week t is predicted using equation (7 ), which, in turn requires 
equation (8) as an input, which, in turn, requires e quations (5) and (6) as inputs. The unknown parameters 
in these equations – which include  all parameters in equation (6), as well as the parameter m in equation 
(7) -- are estimated using household- level scanner panel da ta, as explained in the previous section.iv  
 
Markov-Perfect Equilibrium of the Dynamic Pricing Game 
Let Cjt denote the marginal cost of the manufacturer for brand  j during week t. It is specified as 
0 ,jtj j t j tCc           ( 9 ) 
where 0j stands for average marginal cost of the manufacturer over time, cjt a vector of cost variables, 
and νjt a time-varying cost shock. We assume that νjt is iid across all  j and t. Let νt = (ν1t, ν2t, …, νJt)’. We 
assume that  νt is public information for all manufacturers a nd the retailer (but not to the researcher). 
However, the value of future νs, s>t, is still unknown when manufacturers  and retailer are making pricing 
decisions in week t. 
We assume a discrete-time, in finite-horizon framework (with t = 1, 2, …, ), with manufacturers 
making simultaneous wholesale pricing decisions in each period (week), and playing a repeated Bertrand 
game with discounting. Let ܼ௧ൌ൫ ܦ௝௧,ܨ௝௧,ߦ௝௧,ܿ௝௧,ߥ௝௧,ܵ௝௧௠,݆ൌ1,…,݉,ܬൌ1,…,ݎ݁݉݉ݑܵ;ܯ ௧൯ be a 

14 
 vector of state variables that will impact manufactur ers’ and the retailer’s demand, profits and pricing 
decisions. Given wholesale price Wjt and retail prices Pt = (P 1t, P 2t,…, P Jt)’, the manufacturer’s single-
period profit in period t is given by 
  (, , Z )( ) * .j
tt t j t j t j tWP W C M S       ( 1 0 ) 
where MS jt is the aggregate brand market share defined in equation (7). We assume that the retailer’s 
marginal cost of selling each unit is equal to the wholesale price Wjt.v The retailer chooses retail prices in 
each period, taking wholesale prices as given. The retailer’s single-period profit in period t is given by 
  1(, , Z ) ( ) * .JR
tt t k t k t k t kWP P W M S        ( 1 1 ) 
On account of inertial demand, Wjt and Pjt will not only influence the current market shares of brands, 
MS jt, but also change the installed bases of  all brands in all consumer segments, m
jtS, which, in turn will 
affect the future stream of profits of, as well as fu ture strategic interactions among, the manufacturers and 
the retailer.  
All channel members are assumed to have full information about the current state variables Zt 
before making their pricing decisions . The retailer is assumed to choose (P1t,…, PJt) to maximize the 
expected discounted sum of single-period category profits, 
*( , , Z ) | Zkt R
kkk t ktEP W
  ,       ( 1 2 )  
while the manufacturer is assumed to choose Wjt to maximize the expected discounted sum of single-
period brand profits. 
*( , , Z ) | Zkt j
kkk t ktEP W
  ,       ( 1 3 )  
where the expectation is taken over all the other cha nnel members’ current actions, all future values of 
observed and unobserved states, and all future actions of all channel members. We assume that the 
manufacturers and the retailer have a common discount factor 1 .  

15 
 We focus our attention on Pure-Strategy Mar kov-Perfect Equilibria (MPE), noting that there 
could be multiple such equilibria. In our case, a Markov strategy for a channel member  describes their 
pricing strategy for week t – wholesale or retail, depending on whet her manufacturer or retailer -- as a 
function of currenttZ. Formally, the retailer’s strategy can be written as : ZJ
R PR  , where P = (P1, 
P2…, PJ)’ is the vector of retail prices, while each manufacturer’s strategy can be written as
: Zjj WR  , where Wj is the wholesale price charged by manufacturer j. A Markov profile 
1J
R j j    , which is defined as :  Z (P,W)  , is an MPE if there is no channel member i 
(retailer or manufacturer) who prefers an alternative strategy 'i overi, when all other channel 
members are choosing their strategies according to i. This can be formally written as follows. 
(Z | , ) (Z | ', ), , , ',ii i ii i iVV i Z          (14) 
where Vi is the value function of the channel member that is defined below. 
Given that the behavior is a Markov profile, for each manufacturer j, the discounted sum of 
profits can be written in the form of the following Bellman equation. 
  (Z) sup ( ) * * E (Z' | Z, )
j jW j j j jVW C M S V P    ,    (15) 
Similarly, the retailer’s discounted sum of profits can be written as the form of the following Bellman 
equation. 
 12, ,..., 1(Z) sup ( ) * * E (Z' | Z, ) .
JJ
RP P Pk k kR kVP W M S V P      (16) 
Note that the payoff relevant states for the retailer are identical to those for each manufacturer. While the 
retailer’s pricing decisions are influenced by manuf acturers’ wholesale prices, since the manufacturers’ 
wholesale prices are functions of Z, the value function of the retailer is also a function of Z.  
 
  

16 
 Model Estimation  
We use a two-step model estimation procedure. In th e first step, we estimate the parameters in the 
utility function in equation (1) by maximizing the l og-likelihood function in e quation (4). While doing 
this, we correct for the potential endogeneity of the pri ce variable using the control function approach (see 
Petrin and Train 2010). This involves running a first-stage linear regression of price Pjt versus 
instruments, which include the demand covariates ܦ௝௧,ܨ௝௧, and Summer t and the cost covariates cjt. Let ߦመ௝௧ 
be the fitted price residual for each week. We then use a linear function, ߮∙ߦመ௝௧, to approximate the 
demand shock ߦ௝௧. The assumption of the control function approach is that, conditional on ߦመ௝௧,  the error 
term ߝ̂௛௝௧ൌߦ௝௧െ߮∙ߦመ௝௧൅ߝ௛௝௧ (see equation (1)) is independent of Pjt. This approach is similar to that in 
Villas-Boas and Winer (1999) and has been used, fo r example, by Pancras and Sudhir (2007) and Ma, 
Seetharaman and Narasimhan (2012). Based on thes e demand estimation results, we can calculate how 
the installed base Sjt evolves from week t to week t+1, based on equations (5) and (6).   
The second step is to estimate the cost parameters ( ߙ଴௝,j = 1, 2, …, J, ) in equation (9) from the 
pricing equation. The biggest challenge in this step is that wholesale prices are unobserved, but as they 
will determine the retailer’s retail pricing policy, if the retailer’s continuation va lue in equation (16) is 
known, one can invert the wholesale prices by usi ng the retailer’s optimality conditions for setting retail 
prices. Similarly, if each manufacturer’s continuati on value in equation (15) is known, one can invert 
unobserved manufacturer costs by using the manufactur er’s optimality conditions for setting wholesale 
prices. Thereafter, putting the retailer’s and manufact urers’ value functions together, and by jointly 
exploiting the optimality conditions of  the retailer and the manufacturer, one can infer the marginal costs 
of the manufacturers using observed retail prices. This es timation strategy is adopte d in Sudhir (2001) and 
Villas-Boas (2007) for static games in the retail cha nnel. Since we are dealing with a dynamic game, the 
value functions of the retailer and the manufacturers do not have a closed form. 
There are two estimation methods that have been  previously developed for multi-agent problems, 
such as ours, and have become well-established in  the literature. First, the Pakes and McGuire (1994) 

17 
 algorithm, which uses the nested fixed point (NFXP)  algorithm in a multi-agent context, allows us to 
calculate optimal dynamic policies conditional on give n parameters. However, to use this algorithm we 
would need to search for the fixed points which repr esent the optimal policies for different combinations 
of state variables in a numerical search routine, and repeat the procedure until we get a close match 
between the computed and observed prices. That is, conditional on model parame ters, we must compute 
the MPE for all channel members. The algorithm requires us to iterate over j many times until the best 
response function is satisfied. In our case, the fixed point search must account for both horizontal (among 
manufacturers) as well as vertical (between manufactu rers and the retailer) inte ractions, which increases 
the computational burden. Even more strikingly, with la rge dimensions of the state space, such as in our 
case (with two manufacturers and a retailer, as well as two consumer segments, for each of which we 
need to track both observed and unobserved states), the curse of dimensionality problem becomes severe. 
For this reason, adapting the NFXP algorithm to estimate our dynamic game presents a non-trivial 
challenge. 
The computational burden associated with the NF XP algorithm can be mitigated using the second 
method, the two-step approach of Hotz and Mille r (1993), which has been extended for multi-agent 
problems by Bajari, Benkard and Levin (2007). Under this approach, the policy functions of agents are 
estimated  for various points in the state space using the observed data. With the estimated policy 
functions and state transitions, one can calculate the va lues of the agents, for a given set of structural 
parameters, using the idea of forward simulation, wh ich was first proposed by Hotz, Miller, Sanders and 
Smith (1994). However, to obtain reliable estimate s from the first step requires a large number of 
observations with sufficient variation in state variable s in the data, which makes it difficult to apply in our 
application. More importantly, this method cannot be directly applied to our model where unobserved 
state variables and policies (i.e., wholesale prices of manufacturers are unobserved in the data) exist. 

18 
 We develop a new estimation method that can ha ndle both the existence of unobserved policies of 
agents as well as a high-dimensional state space, with a lower computational burden. We describe our 
estimation method next. 
 
Proposed Estimation Method for the Dynamic Pricing Game 
Under the MPE assumption, optimal actions of th e manufacturers are functions of payoff relevant 
states. Similar to Hotz and Miller (1993), we approxi mate the optimal policies of manufacturers and the 
retailer using a parametric polynomia l function of observed and unobs erved states. Then, conditional on 
any trial set of parameters of the policy functions, we forward si mulate the value functions. Our 
estimation strategy searches the parameters of polic y functions and structural parameters simultaneously 
through one numerical search routine, by minimi zing a criterion function based on moment conditions, 
together with a penalty function if the optimality conditions are not satisfied. At true structural 
parameters, it is required that our parametric policy functions are cons istent with the policies from the 
data, and the parametric policy functions satisfy th e first-order conditions. Th is strategy differs from 
Bajari, Benkard and Levin (2007) as  policy functions are not estimate d in the first step; instead, the 
parametric policy functions for unobserved wholesale prices are identified from the constraint in our 
criterion function that the functions have to be cons istent with the necessary optimality conditions (we 
will discuss this below). Therefore, our approach is  similar to the MPEC appr oach proposed by Su and 
Judd (2012). 
The objective of the estimation is to estimate the parameters ( ߙ଴௝, j = 1, 2, …, J, ). We 
parameterize the retailer’s retail pricing policies for brands as flexible functions of state variables Z as 
shown below. 
ˆ(Z | )R
j jj PP ,          (17) 

19 
 where ˆ()jP denotes the parametric approximation of the optimal retail policies, and R
j  is a vector of 
parameters. We also parameterize manufacturers’ wholes ale pricing policies as flexible functions of state 
variables as shown below. 
ˆ(Z | )M
jj jWW  ,         (18) 
where ˆ()jW denotes the parametric approximation of the optimal wholesale pricing policies of 
manufacturer j, and M
j  is a vector of parameters. 
Given the policy functions in equations (17) and (18), as well as the structural parameters, the 
expected continuation values, E (Z' | Z, )jVP andE( Z ' | Z , )RVP , which are represented by the second terms 
on the right-hand side of equations (15) and (16) re spectively, can be computed using forward simulation 
(see Online Appendix 1 for details). 
Similar to the Euler equation estimation approach  used in Berry and Pakes (2000), we take the 
derivative of the value function of the retailer in equation (16) with respect to retail price Pj in order to 
construct the J first-order conditions for th e retailer, as shown below. 
1(Z) E (Z' | Z, )() * * 0 .J
k RR
jj k k
k jj jMS VV PFM S P WPP P
           (19) 
The derivative E( Z ' | Z , ) /RjVP P  can be obtained using the chain rule, as shown below. 
E( Z ' | Z , ) E( Z ' | Z , ) '(Z, )*.'(Z, )RR
jjVP VP SP
PS P P        ( 2 0 )  
Rearranging terms, we can write the first-order c ondition for retail price such that it expresses the 
retailer’s optimal retail price for a brand as a function of Z, as shown below. 
1
* E( Z ' | Z , )(Z) ( ) * * * .j k R
jj j k k
kj jj jMS MS VPPW M S P WPP P
                   (21) 

20 
 If the parametric policy function in equation (17) is  optimal, for any given set of state variables the 
computed retail prices should match the retail prices  from equation (21), after allowing for approximation 
error due to the parametric po licy function, as shown below. 
* ˆ (Z) (Z | )R
j jj PP          ( 2 2 )  
We take the derivative of the value function of th e manufacturer in equation (15) with respect to 
wholesale price Wj in order to construct the first-order cond itions for the manufacturer, as shown below. 
11(Z) E (Z' | Z, )() * * * * 0 .JJ
jj j kk
jj j
kk jk j k jVM S V P PPMS W CWP W P W
               (23) 
The derivative E (Z' | Z, ) /j k VP P  can be obtained using the chain rule, as shown below. 
E( Z ' | Z , ) E( Z ' | Z , ) '(Z, )*.'(Z, )jj
kkVP VP SP
PS P P        ( 2 4 ) 
Rearranging terms, we can write the first-order conditi on for wholesale price such that it expresses the 
manufacturer’s optimal wholesale price for a brand as a function of Z, as shown below. 
1
*
11E( Z ' | Z , )(Z) * * * .JJ
jj kk
jj j
kk kj k jVP M S PPWC M SPW P W
                   (25) 
The above equation involves the re tailer’s retail pricing responses to manufactu rers’ wholesale price 
changes, i.e., /PW . We take the derivative of the retailer’s first-order condition, Fj  (see equation 19), 
with respect to all of the J retail prices ( dP1,…, dPJ) and with respect to a single wholesale price Wj, with 
variation dW j. The following equation system can be derived. 
11 1 2 2 1 1 1
11 2 2 2 2 2 2
11 2 2// / /
// / /
// / /j jj J J j
j jj J Jj
j Jj J j J J J J jF dP dW F dP dW F dP dW MS P
F dP dW F dP dW F dP dW MS P
F dP dW F dP dW F dP dW MS P   
   
   


,    (26) 

21 
 where 2(Z) /ij R i jFV P P   . Therefore, we can represent the above JxJ total derivatives in matrix form as 
follows 
1 dPFAdW ,           ( 2 7 )  
where the [ j, i] th elements of the above matrices are as shown below. 
[, ] ,  [, ] ,  [, ] f o r  , 1 , 2 , . . . , .j i
ji
ijP MS dPjiF j i F A j i i jJdW W P      (28) 
Substituting from equations (27) and (28) in to eq uation (25), we obtain the manufacturer’s optimal 
wholesale pricing policy function. If the parametric policy function in equation (18) is optimal, for any 
given set of state variables, the computed wholes ale prices should match the wholesale prices from 
equation (25), after allowing for approximation erro r from the parametric policy function, as shown 
below. 
* ˆ (Z) (Z | ).M
jj jWW           ( 2 9 )  
Combine equations (21) and (25), we obtain 
1
1
11E( Z ' | Z , )() * * *
E( Z ' | Z , )           + * * * .j k R
j j jjk k
kj jj j
JJ
jj kk
j
kk kj k jMS MS VPPC M S PWPP P
VP M S PPMSPW P W



                
           
  (30)  
Let ( , , , , 1,..., , 1,..., , )m
tj t j t j t j t tX D F c S j J m J Summer  , as a subset of Zt, be the vector of observed (to 
the researcher) state variables. To recover the structur al parameters of interest, we construct the following 
two moment conditions. 
22[ | X] 0, [ | X] 0jj jEE   ,       ( 3 1 )  

22 
 where ߪ௝ଶ is the variance of the cost shock ߥ௝ that we also estimate in the model. A key point of departure 
of our estimation approach from the GMM estimator that is typically used in the literature lies in 
equations (22) and (29). Given a set of state variables Zq, where q=1,…, K Z, and KZ is the dimensionality 
of the set, our estimates are obtained by minimizi ng not only a criterion function that is based on the 
moment conditions in equation (31), but also the following two “penalty” functions. 
  *2
1ˆ [( Z ) ( Z |) ] ,  ZK
R
jq j q j
qPP 
  
*2
1ˆ [( Z ) ( Z |) ] ,  ZK
M
jq j q j
qWW 
        ( 3 2 )  
At the true policy functions and true values of mode l parameters, the errors associated with the moment 
conditions in equation (31), as well as the approximation errors in equa tion (32), will be minimized. Note 
that we treat the differences between optimal pri ces and the corresponding parameterized policy functions 
as approximation errors that should be minimized in the estimation routine. This is different from the 
approach in Su and Judd (2012), since we do not estimate *(Z )j q P  and *(Z )j q W  as constrained 
parameters. Instead, our targets are parametric functions (Z | )R
j qjP and ˆ(Z | )M
jq jW that approximate 
the optimal prices. This strategy enab les us to only estimate parameters R
j andM
j, which will vastly 
reduce the number of model parameters. 
The asymptotic distribution of our estimator is difficult to derive (as in BBL). Furthermore, we 
have to account for the estimation error in the estimat ed demand function. Therefore, we use bootstrap to 
calculate the standard errors of the estimated s upply side parameters (see  Online Appendix 2 for the 
details). 
 
  

23 
 Model Identification  
Regarding model identification, the moment conditions in equation (31) indicate that the 
estimation of the cost parameters Θ஼ൌ(ߙ଴௝, j = 1, 2, …, J, ) relies on the identification assumption that 
( , , , , 1,..., , 1,..., , )m
tj t j t j t j t tX D F c S j J m J Summer   is independent from the cost shock ߥjt. In particular, 
we assume that the cost shock does not affect m
jtS directly. Instead, it has transitory effects on 
manufacturers’ payoffs, as well as the retailer’s payoff, by affecting their pricing decisions and thus will 
impact futurem
jtS, for s>t. In other words, as in Rust (1987), we assume that the observed states Xt and the 
unobserved states (i.e.,jt), are conditionally independent. Model id entification also requires that there is 
sufficient variation in Xt in the data. In the empirical applicatio n in the next section, our data shows 
intertemporal fluctuations in the cost variables ( ct) and seasonality ( Summer t); there are also large 
variations across brands and time pe riods in demand shifters including , ,jtj tDF andm
jtS.  
We conduct a series of Monte Carlo simulati ons to study how well our proposed estimation 
approach can recover the model parameters under a wi de range of assumed stru ctural parameters, i.e., 
high versus low average cost, high versus low variance of  cost shocks, using a sample size similar to the 
empirical application that we will describe in the ne xt section. Under each tested case in our simulations, 
we find that the estimated cost parameters are very close to their true (assumed) values. The results are 
reported in Online Appendix 3. This Monte Carlo si mulation exercise gives us confidence regarding the 
efficiency of our proposed estimator. 
The goal of our paper is to disentangle the ha rvesting and investing incentives of manufacturers 
and the retailer. The identification of the incentives  relies on the assumptions of the dynamic pricing 
game that manufacturers are Stackelberg leaders and the retailer is a Stackelberg follower, and that 
manufacturers engage in repeated Bertrand price co mpetition. These assumptions let us construct the 
optimality condition for the retailer in equation ( 19). This condition is different from that which 
corresponds to myopic profit maximization on account of the last term, i.e., *[ E (Z'| Z, ) / ]RjVP P . 

24 
 When inertia exists, the derivative is negative, i.e ., higher current price will reduce the future installed 
customer base S’∈Z’ thus lowering the expected continuation value of the next period E( Z ' | Z , )RVP . 
Given the demand and cost parameters, one can infe r the harvesting and investing incentives of the 
retailer with the following procedure: First, th e difference between the computed profit margin (Pj – W j), 
as the solution of the equation system (for all J equations) in the full dynamic model, and the computed 
margin when the retailer maximizes the myopic profit (i.e. fix ρ to zero), will represent the investing 
incentive of the retailer. Next, with ρ fixed to zero, the effect of inertia on demand is captured by the 
second term, 1() * [ / ]J
kk k j kPW M S P , in equation (19). Under inertia l demand, the partial derivative 
j j MSP  will be less negative than when inertia is not present (i.e., h in equation (1) is zero), and the 
retailer will set a higher retail price Pj. The difference between the computed profit margin (Pj – W j), 
when the retailer maximizes the myopic profit (i.e. fix ρ but not h to zero), and the computed margin 
when inertia does not exist (i.e. fix both ρ and h to zero), will represent the harvesting incentive of the 
retailer.  
We can also disentangle the harvesting and in vesting incentives of manufacturers based on the 
optimality condition for manufacturer j in equation (23). The last term 1*[ E ( Z ' | Z , ) / ]J
j k kVP P   
*[ / ]kjPW captures the influence of th e current wholesale price, Wj, on retail prices, and thus change 
the next period’s state S’∈Z’ and the expected continuation value, E (Z' | Z, )jVP , of the next period. By 
similar rationale as above , the difference between the computed profit margin ( )j j WC , as the solution of 
the above equation system (for all J equations) in the full dynamic model, and the computed margin when 
manufacturer j maximizes the myopic profit (i.e. fix ρ to zero), represents the investing incentive of the 
manufacturer. Next, with ρ fixed to zero, the difference between the computed profit margin ( )j j WC , 
when the manufacturer maximizes the myopic profit (i.e. fix ρ but not h to zero), and the computed 
margin when inertia does not exist (i.e. fix both ρ and h to zero), will represent the harvesting incentive 

25 
 of the manufacturer. To summarize, given the demand and cost parameters, we can quantify the 
harvesting and investing incentives of manufacturers and the retailer based on the assumptions of the 
game structure. 
Our proposed estimation approach a llows the researcher to invert strategies that are unobserved in 
the data from the optimality conditions. Thus, unlik e BBL we can allow for unobserved actions in our 
model. Furthermore, since we estimate the parame terized policy functions from the optimality conditions, 
given arbitrary state variables, it does not require la rge number of observations in data. Compared with 
the nested fixed-point approach in Pakes and McGuire (1994), the researcher does not need to iterate the 
value or policy functions to search for “fixed points”  as equilibrium prices in an inner algorithm. We 
instead simultaneously estimate the structural model parameters and the parame terized policy functions. 
We find that this strategy vastly reduces the computational time in model estimation. 
Since our methodology relies on first-order conditi ons from the Bellman equation, it is designed 
specifically for problems with contin uous policies such as pricing, advertising, R&D investment etc. For 
problems involving both continuous and discrete (e.g., entry and exit)  policies, one can use a hybrid 
algorithm that uses inequality constraints for discrete actions, together with the first order conditions for 
continuous actions. To further decrease the computa tional burden, the numerical search routine should 
start with a good set of initial values. For example, one  can start with the parameters from the static 
counterpart of the dynamic game. Since the parameters  from the static game may be fairly close to the 
dynamic counterpart, it reduces the convergence time of the numerical search routine significantly. 
Another issue concerns how to flexibly model th e pricing policy functions. Employing a high-order 
polynomial approximation may lead to too many estimable parameters, especially when the 
dimensionality of the state space is large. Therefore,  we start with a low-order (e.g., linear) polynomial, 
and then gradually increase the order of the pol ynomial until the optimal and the parametric policy 
functions closely match each other.vi  
 

26 
 Empirical Results 
We use scanner panel data from Information Re sources Incorporated’s (IRI) scanner-panel 
database on cola purchases of 370 households making 31062 shopping trips at a supermarket store in a 
suburban market of a large U.S. city. The dataset cove rs a two-year period from June 1991 to June 1993. 
The supermarket is a local monopolist in the sense of not having other supermarkets nearby and, 
therefore, drawing a loyal core group of shoppers to the same store for their grocery shopping. Table 1 
presents some descriptive statistics on weekly marketi ng variables and market shares of four major cola 
brands in the data. The 370 households are obser ved to purchase cola during 5784 (18.62%) of their 
shopping trips. In terms of average prices, we see that Coke, Pepsi and Royal Crown occupy a high price-
tier, while the Private Label occupies a low price-tier, at the store.vii In terms of display and feature 
promotions, we see that Pepsi is displayed and featur ed more frequently than the other brands by the 
retailer. In terms of average weekly market shares, Pe psi is observed to be the dominant cola brand (with 
an average market share of 0.4569), while the Private Label is the smallest bran d (with an average market 
share of 0.0671). 
[Insert Table 1 and Figure 1 here] 
Figure 1 shows the shares of Coke, relative to th at of Pepsi, in term s of quantity sales and 
installed customer base, over the sample period. Due to the demand and cost shocks in the market, there is 
a large fluctuation in Coke’s share of sales across we eks. Changes in Coke’s share of installed customer 
base are smaller, as the last brand choice of house holds who do not make purchas es is taken into account; 
still, we observe a significant variation that is n ecessary to estimate the state dependence in the demand 
function. 
 
Estimation Results for the Demand Model with Switching Costs 
We use the control function approach to control for the price endogeneity. Retail prices of every 
brand are regressed against the covariates in the u tility function, including brand intercepts, displays, 
features, and the indicator of summer, as well as the c ovariates in the cost function, including the price of 

27 
 sugar and petroleum.viii Assuming that the demand shocks are i ndependent across geographical markets, 
we also include the retail prices in another store in  a suburban area that has different demographics from 
the area where the focal stor e is located. We then use ߮∙ߦመ௝௧, where ߦመ௝௧ is the price residual, as a control 
function that enters the utility function for brand j. We assume that the error term ߝ̂௛௝௧ൌߦ௝௧െ߮∙ߦመ௝௧൅
ߝ௛௝௧ is independent of Pjt and, together with the error term ߝ௛଴௧ for the no-purchase option, are distributed 
iid Gumbel with location 0 and scale 1. Therefore,  the choice probability function in equation (3) 
becomes the well-known multinomial Logit share function.   
The first two columns of Table 2 present the es timates of our proposed demand model under the 
2-support heterogeneity specification.ix Although the brand preference for Pepsi is higher than for Coke 
for the two segments, the difference is not statistically  significant, suggesting that the main reason that 
Pepsi enjoys a higher market share is because of th e lower retail price and more frequent displays and 
features (see Table 1). The estimated price coefficien t is negative, and the estimated display and feature 
coefficients are positive, as expected, for both segm ents. Between the two segm ents, segment 2 consists 
of 71.5 % of the households. It is found to be more sens itive to price, display, and feature than segment 1. 
The smaller values of brand intercepts (except for Pr ivate Label) imply that households in this segment 
purchase less cola than segment 1.  The seasonality effect of summer is  negative in both segments, which 
is an unexpected result. We check from data and find that the average weekly sales of the cola category 
during summer are indeed lower than that in other seasons.x  
The estimated inertia coeffici ents are positive for both segments. The estimated parameters 
translate to switching costs -- which can be interpreted as the price premium that a brand can charge to a 
consumer who bought that same brand last time, re lative to a consumer who bought another brand last 
time – of $0.28 and $0.12 in segments 1 and 2, respec tively. These are substantiv ely significant, given the 
average prices of cola brands (see Table 1). The switching costs have a major impact on consumers’ 
brand choice and firms’ revenue. For the more inertia l segment 1, the purchase probabilities of Pepsi and 
Coke, assuming that their previous purchases were th e same brand, are about three times higher than the 

28 
 purchase probabilities when their previous purchases were a different brand. Segment 2 has a lower 
switching cost; still, the purchase probabilities when th e previous purchase was the same brand are twice 
as high as the purchase probabilities when the previ ous purchase was a different brand. These give 
manufacturers strong investing as well as harves ting incentives. The economic significance of the 
switching costs motivates us to model the price competition between Coke and Pepsi as a dynamic 
pricing game. As very experienced and knowledgeable manufacturers in the industry for over a century, it 
is reasonable to believe that both Coke and Pepsi have taken into account the consumer inertia when 
deciding wholesale prices. 
[Insert Table 2 here]  
To check the robustness of our specification of the inertia, we estimate an alternative model 
assuming that the state dependence will only last for one  period. That is, the inertia will reduce to zero in 
the utility function if a household doe s not purchase any cola brand in the current week. The last two 
columns in Table 2 reports the results. Estimated model parameters are qualitatively the same as the 
proposed demand model. Differences in the paramete rs between the two segments are also similar. 
However, this alternative model has a lower likeli hood function value than the proposed model, and it can 
be rejected based on the BIC.  
 
Estimation Results for the Dynamic Pricing Model in the Presence of Switching Costs  
Using the results from the proposed inertial dema nd model, we estimate the dynamic pricing 
model in the distribution channel as the next step. Given any set of trial parameters, we use forward 
simulation to simulate the expected value functions for Coke and Pepsi and th e retailer. Conditional on 
the parametric policy functions of players, the insta lled customer base of eith er Coke or Pepsi evolves 
according to the state equation (5). Future displa ys and features are simulated from the empirical 
distributions in the data. Future demand shocks ߦመ’s are also simulated from the empirical distribution 
which is estimated from the price regression we disc ussed above. Finally, we draw future cost shocks 

29 
 (assumed to be iid over time) from the distribution normal (0, ߪ௝ଶ), where ߪ௝ଶ is the variance of the cost 
shocks for brand j.xi 
The second column of Table 3 reports the estimate d marginal cost parameters for Coke and Pepsi 
of the proposed model (“Dynamic Model (with Reta iler)”). The average marginal cost of Pepsi is 
estimated to be 15.5% lower than Coke, offering a par tial explanation why its average retail price in Table 
1 is lower than Coke’s. Given the average retail prices , the estimated costs transl ate to estimated channel 
profit margins of $0.367 and $0.374 for Coke and Pepsi, respectively. The estimated costs are in the ball-
park of published estimates of margin al costs in this industry during that period (see, for example, Yoffie 
1994), and lend face validity to our estimates. The esti mates for the cost variables petroleum and sugar 
are insignificant and small in magnitude, suggesting th at, while it is well known that both Coke and Pepsi 
not only have high capital costs but also spend a lot on advertising, the contribution of cost variables to 
marginal costs is relatively much lower.  
For comparison, the third column of Table 3 (“Myopic Model (with Retailer)”) reports the 
estimated marginal costs yielded by a structural ec onometric model assuming that all players are myopic. 
Because the benefit of installed customer base for fu ture profits is not considered, the manufacturers and 
the retailer in the model do not have  investing incentive. The estimated average marginal costs for Pepsi 
and Coke are lower than the estimates from the propos ed dynamic model. This is because, when players 
in the game only have harvesting incentive, the pred icted profit margins from the myopic model have to 
be higher than the dynamic model, and the estima ted marginal costs will be adjusted accordingly.xii We 
also estimate another dynamic pricing model (see the fi fth column of Table 3) th at ignores the existence 
of the retailer and assumes, instead, that manufacturer s directly set retail prices (as in Chintagunta and 
Rao 1996, Dube, Hitsch and Rossi 2009). The estimated average marginal costs yielded by this model are 
much higher than their counterparts under the full-c hannel dynamic model. This is because, since the 
double marginalization problem is absent, the estimated costs must be higher in order to compensate for 
the absence of the retailer mark-up so that the mode l can explain the observed (high) retail prices. This 

30 
 finding is reminiscent of the result in Che, Sudhir and Seetharaman (2007) that an empirical test of 
whether a collusive or a competitive model of dynamic pricing among manufacturers better explains 
observed prices may lead one to spuriously pick the collusive model if one ignores the strategic pricing 
role of the retailer. This happens in their case becau se the estimated oligopolis tic conduct parameter falls 
under the regime of manufacturer collusion in order to compensate for the absence of the retailer mark-up 
so that the model can explain the obser ved (high) retail prices of brands. 
[Insert Table 3 here] 
In order to understand the substantive implications,  we use the estimated structural parameters of 
the proposed model (from the second column in Table 3) , assuming that it is the first week of summer, 
and compute the resulting equilibrium wholes ale and retail prices for Coke and Pepsi.xiii We compare the 
associated retail margins and manufacturer margins to those yielded by the manufacturers-only model 
(from the fifth column in Table 3). Under the full -channel dynamic pricing model, the equilibrium 
channel profit margins of Coke and Pepsi are $0.397  (=$0.229 for retailer + $0 .168 for manufacturer) and 
$0.427 (=$0.230 for retailer + $0.197 for manufacturer),  respectively, while under the manufacturers-only 
dynamic pricing model, the corresponding profit ma rgins are $0.146 and $0.163, respectively. These 
findings imply that the profit margins of channel memb ers are under-estimated if the strategic pricing role 
of the retailer in the distribution channel is ignored . When evaluating the welfare impact of a public 
policy (e.g., increasing sales tax) or possible anti- trust pricing effects of impending mergers, it is 
important for policy makers to understand both the tota l channel profit as well as how it is distributed 
between manufacturers and retailers. Ignoring the strate gic role of retailers can lead to substantive 
distortions in predicte d policy consequences. 
 
Policy Implications 
 We conduct a series of counterfactual studies, ba sed on the estimation results, in this section to 
examine the policy implications from our full channe l dynamic pricing model. Our objective is to first 
investigate the harvesting and investing incentives of each of the channel members under the empirical 

31 
 context in our data. This helps us investigate the poten tial conflicts of interests in the distribution channel 
when inertia exists in the demand. We then inves tigate how the harvesting ve rsus investing incentives 
change under different market environments, reflect ed in manipulated changes in consumer price 
sensitivity and inertia. We also study how retail and w holesale prices, as well as the profits of channel 
members, change as market conditions change.  
 To conduct counterfactuals, we compute, given a state variable Z (see equation (5)), the optimal 
wholesale prices for the manufacturers and retail prices for the retailer. For the simplicity of analysis we 
assume there are no demand shocks ξ’s nor cost shocks ߥ’s. We also assume that it is the first week of 
summer. We use a modified NFXP algorithm proposed in Pakes and McGuire (1994). Computational 
details are provided in Online Appendix 4.   
Harvesting versus Investing 
We quantify and, therefore, decompose the harvesting and investing incentives for the 
manufacturers and the retailer in this section. To achie ve this objective, we have to compare different 
scenarios. First, we assume that one or all firms become myopic thus the discount factor is zero, i.e., the 
last term of either equation (19) or  equation (23) is set to zero, and le t all firms re-optimize their pricing 
strategy. Myopic players have no investing incentive. Comparing the profit margin, when the market is at 
equilibrium, under this scenario with that from th e proposed dynamic model will help to quantify the 
investing incentive. Next, we assume a static scenario in which the inertia ( λSD in Table 2) of the two 
customer segments is fixed to zero. The derivative kjMSP in equation (19) or equation (23) has a 
larger magnitude than when inertia is present. St atic players have neither investing nor harvesting 
incentive. Comparing the profit margin under this scen ario with that from the myopic scenario will help 
us to separate the harvesting from investing incentives.  
We assume the current period is the first week of  summer, and compute the market equilibrium of 
the week under different scenarios. Results are repor ted in Table 4. We use two decomposition methods. 

32 
 First, we assume that all firms change to myopic or  static players simultaneously. Results are reported at 
the upper panel. We then assume either Coke, Pepsi,  or the retailer become myopic or static, while the 
other firms remain fully dynamic. Results of this method are reported at the lower panel. Results from 
either method are qualitatively similar. As far as the retailer’s profit margins are concerned, the harvesting 
incentive significantly increases its margins for Coke and Pepsi, while the investing incentive slightly 
increases the margins further, the net effect  being that the retailer’s profit margins are higher  than those in 
the absence of inertia. In other word s, the retailer does not have the in centive to reduce current margin for 
the investing purpose for any brand. This is because increasing the installed customer base for one brand 
implies reducing the installed customer base for anot her brand that the retailer also carries. The retailer 
therefore is unwilling to sacrifice the current margin to  help the future sales for any brand. The harvesting 
incentive contributes the lion’s share of the increase in retail prices, yielding equilibrium retail profit 
margins for both brands that are higher than those in  the absence of inertia. The investing effort comes 
entirely from the manufacturers, which ends up decreas ing the profit margin of Coke by 22-23 % and 
Pepsi by about 17 %, respectively. This finding highlights a new type of vertical conflict that arises in the 
distribution channel, between manufacturers and the re tailer, in the presence of inertial demand. This 
conflict arises on account of the retailer’s ability to free ride, by charging higher retail prices in the future, 
on manufacturers’ current investments in the form of reduced wholesale prices. The asymmetry in 
harvesting and investing incentives are also found betw een manufacturers. Pepsi, as a more preferred 
brandxiv, has a stronger harvesting incentive. Coke, on th e other hand, has less ability to harvest and is 
pressured to invest in building cons umer installed base for future. The net effect is that the manufacturer 
profit margin for Coke is reduced much more th an for Pepsi using either decomposition method. 
To conclude, we observe that, while manufactur ers have both significant harvesting and investing 
incentives that move in opposite direc tions, the retailer always only harvestsxv, illustrating a vertical 
conflict between manufacturers and the retailer, in th e presence of inertial demand, that has not been 
documented in the literature. Furthe rmore, brands with a low consum er preference will have stronger 

33 
 investing incentive and smaller harvesting incentive. This highli ghts how brand heterogeneity can 
contribute to significant differences in profit margin among manufacturers.  
Finally, we compare the decomposition results w ith a finite-period dynamic model as in Che, 
Sudhir and Seetharaman (2007), in which we assume the manufacturers and the retailer only look forward 
for one to five periods. Results from these models also  suggest that there is little investing incentive for 
the retailer. The investing incentive, however, is und er-estimated from 14% for Coke and 10% for Pepsi, 
when players look forward for five periods, to 23% for Coke and 17% for Pepsi, when players only look 
forward for the next period. This result demonstrat es the importance of modeling the full dynamic price 
competition, instead of finite periods, in order to re cover the true investing and harvesting incentives of 
manufacturers and the retailer. 
 
Effects of Increasing Price Sensitivity 
 Suppose that as a  result of changes in the socio-economic environment, households in our data 
become more price sensitive. We study in this sec tion how such a change will impact the harvesting and 
investing incentives of channel members and, c onsequently, the equilibri um prices. Based on the 
estimation results, we vary the price sensitivity of the two customer segments from  -40% to +40% of their 
estimated magnitudes, and compute the steady-state e quilibrium prices, market shares, and profits for 
Coke and Pepsi. First, the harvesting incentive of the retailer and manufacturers declines as households 
become more price-sensitive. However, while ma nufacturers’ investing incentive also declines, the 
retailer’s investing incentive remains unchanged at its ne gligible value. The net impact is that as price 
sensitivity increases, the difference between the retailer and the manufact urers, in terms of how sensitive 
their profit margins are to accounting for dynamic incentives in pricing, narrows (see Figure 2a). 
 Unsurprisingly, we find that both wholesale and retail prices decrease as consumer price 
sensitivity increases (see Figure 2b). However, retail pri ces are observed to decrease at a faster rate than 
wholesale prices. This is because the retailer’s harvesting incentive decreases, while the retailer’s 
investing incentive continues to be negligible, w ith an increase in consumer price sensitivity. 

34 
 Consequently, the retailer significantly loses its abilit y to leverage the benefits of inertial demand as 
consumers become more price sensitive. On the othe r hand, each manufacturer’s harvesting and investing 
incentives both decrease with an increase in consumer price sensitivity, with the resulting price changes in 
opposing directions roug hly cancelling each other, thus yielding a sm aller decrease in wholesale prices.  
[Insert Figure 2 here] 
 
Effects of Increasing Inertia 
With the technology development, manufacturers have the ability to identify to which customer 
segment each household belongs, based on past purchas es, and then follow up with targeted marketing 
activities to increase their inertia. On e way of increasing inertia is to  offer a coupon each time households 
purchase Coke or Pepsi, for the use of next purchas es. This may increase “top of mind” recall among the 
installed bases of each brand toward the brand they pu rchased last time and, therefore, make them repeat 
purchase the favored brands with greater likelihood.xvi We compute the equilibrium outcomes for Coke 
and Pepsi at various values of the iner tia parameter for one segment at a time. 
Figures 3a and 3b illustrate the changes in profit margins and prices, respectively, for the retailer 
and manufacturers when the level of the inertia of cu stomer segment 1 (heavy user / less price sensitive) 
increases from 0 to 2 (estimated inertia is 1.39). We find that the harvesting incentive of each channel 
member increases, and while the investing incentive of  each manufacturer also increases, that of the 
retailer remains almost unchanged at its negligible valu e, as the inertia of customer segment 1 increases. 
Consequently, retail prices rise but wholesale prices remain relatively stable, implying that the retailer 
gains disproportionately more than the ma nufacturers from increasing levels of inertia. 
Figures 3c and 3d illustrate the changes in profit ma rgins and prices, respectively, for the retailer 
and manufacturers when the level of the inertia of cust omer segment 2 (light user / more price sensitive) 
increases from 0 to 2 (estimated inertia is 0.82). Unlike  the findings in Figures 3a and 3b, we see here that 
when inertia of customer segment 2 increases, retail  prices of both Coke and Pepsi decrease. This is 
because the retailer is willing to sacrifice profit marg in in this case for the benefit of expanding the 

35 
 demand from the price sensitive segment 2, which is al so a much larger segment. The demand expansion 
effect will dominate the benefit of exploiting the in creased inertia; thus, the retailer’s profit will also 
increase. For manufacturers, as the inertia of custom er segment 2 increases, the profit margin increases 
for Pepsi but decreases for Coke. The total profit in creases for both manufacturers since market demand 
has expanded because of the lower retail prices. 
As far as consumer welfare is concerned, the im plications are interestingly different across the 
two cases. In Figure 3b, it is observed that as the iner tia of customer segment 1 increases, retail prices for 
both brands increase, which decreases consumer welfare.  However, in Figure 3d, it is observed that as the 
inertia of customer segment 2 increases, retail prices  of both brands decrease, which increases consumer 
welfare. In other words, increasing inertia in custom er segment 2 increases the aggregate welfare of all 3 
parties – consumers, retailer and manufacturers – in th e distribution channel. Our finding that consumer 
welfare can increase, under some conditions, as switc hing costs increase, is new to the literature on 
switching costs. They depart from the usual finding in this literature that an increase in switching costs 
hurts consumers by increasing retail pr ices (Viard 2007, Dube et al. 2008). 
[Insert Figure 3 here] 
 
Conclusions 
In this study, we propose and estimate a structur al pricing model for the full distribution channel 
when consumers have switching costs. For this purpose , we study the cola market, which is characterized 
by significant inertia in consumers’ brand choices ov er time. We estimate a consumer-level brand choice 
model, which includes the effects of inertia, using scanner panel data  on cola brand choi ces of consumers 
in a local market over a period of two years. We th en estimate a structural econometric pricing model, 
that accounts for the pricing interactions, both am ong manufacturers, as well as between each 
manufacturer and the retailer, using retail tracking data  on store-level prices of co la brands from the same 
local market over the same period of two years. 

36 
 We find that the cola category is characterized by  significant inertia in demand. Our study reveals 
that while the retailer exploits the benefit of inertia l demand by appropriately increasing the retail profit 
margin, the cost of investing is borne entirely by the manufacturers. The retailer effectively free rides on 
the manufacturers’ efforts by taking a lion’s share of the additional profits that accrue to the channel from 
the existence of inertial demand. This result highlights an interesting vertical conflict in the distribution 
channel, between manufacturers and th e retailer, in the presence of inertial demand. Further, we also find 
that the less preferred brand does not have the same luxury of harvesting that is enjoyed by the more 
preferred brand. The less preferred brand is, therefore,  pressured to invest for the future by cutting its 
current wholesale price. This decreases its profit marg in when compared to a market without inertia. This 
finding illustrates how asymmetric brand preferences can  lead to significant differences among the brands 
in harvesting versus inves ting pricing incentives.  
Based on the estimation results, we use a simulatio n study to show that the retailer significantly 
loses its ability to leverage the benefits of inertial demand as consumers become more price sensitive. On 
the other hand, each manufacturer’s harvesting and inve sting incentives both decrease with an increase in 
consumer price sensitivity, yielding a smaller decrease  in wholesale prices. In another simulation study, 
we find that when inertia of the more price sens itive customer segment increases, it can increase the 
aggregate welfare of all 3 parties – consumers, reta iler and manufacturers – in the distribution channel. 
These findings are new to the litera ture on consumer switching costs. 
Some caveats are in order. First, we acknowledge  that our estimates of marginal costs may be 
biased if consumers are, in fact, forward-looking in their decision-making. For example, Villas-Boas 
(2015) shows that if consumers foresee the future pric ing consequences of their inertia, they become less 
price sensitive, which raises the equilibrium prices  of firms. Second, our model does not capture the 
consumer stockpiling behavi or, which has implications for dynami c pricing. In the cola category, 
however, stockpiling is not pervasive as revealed in ou r data. Therefore, ignoring the effects of consumer 
stockpiling may not be a critical omission in our cas e. That said, while extending our model to product 
categories where consumer stockpiling is, in fact, sign ificant, explicitly modeling stockpiling behavior, as 

37 
 well as its implications for dynamic pricing, would be necessary. Last, but not least, modeling non-price 
competition including display and feature decisions jo intly with the pricing decisions would be an 
important, but challenging, area of future research. 
  

38 
 References  
Bajari, P., Benkard, C. L., Levin, J. (2007). Estim ating Dynamic Models of Imperfect Competition, 
Econometrica, 75, 5, 1331-1370. 
Beggs, A., Klemperer, P. (1992). Multi-Period Comp etition with Switching Costs, Econometrica, 57, 3, 
651-666. 
Berry, S., Levinsohn, J., Pakes, A. (1995). Automobile  Prices in Market Equilibrium, Econometrica, 63, 
4, 841-890. 
Berry, S., & Pakes, A. (2000). Estimation from th e optimality conditions for dynamic controls. 
Manuscript, Yale University, 841-890. 
Che, H., Sudhir, K., Seetharaman, P. B. (2007). Bounded Rationality in Pricing Under State Dependent 
Demand: Do Firms Look Ahead? How Far Ahead?, Journal of Marketing Research, 44, 3, 434-449. 
Chintagunta, P. K., Rao, V. R. (1996). Pricing Stra tegies in a Dynamic Duopoly: A Differential Game 
Model, Management Science, 42, 11, 1501-1514. 
Desai, P. S., Koenigsberg, O., Purohit, D. (2004) . Strategic Decentralization and Channel Coordination, 
Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 2, 1, 5-22. 
Doganoglu, T. (2010). Switching Costs, Experience Goods and Dynamic Price Competition, Quantitative 
Marketing and Economics, 8, 1, 167-205. 
Dube, J. P., Hitsch, G. J., Rossi, P. E. (2009). Do Switching Costs Make Markets Less Competitive?, 
Journal of Marketing Research, 46, 3, 435-445. 
Dube, J. P., Hitsch, G. J., Rossi, P. E. (2010). State Dependence and Alternative Explanations for 
Consumer Inertia, The RAND Journal of Economics, 41, 3, 417-445. 

39 
 Dube, J. P., Hitsch, G. J., Rossi, P. E., Vitorino, M. A. (2008). Category Pricing with State-Dependent 
Utility, Marketing Scien ce, 27, 3, 417-429. 
Dukes, A. J., Gal-Or, E., Srinivasan, K. (2006). Channe l Bargaining with Retailer Asymmetry, Journal of 
Marketing Research, 43, 1, 84-97. 
Hall, R. E. (1979). Stochastic implications of the life cycle-permanent income hypothesis: theory and 
evidence. NBER Working Paper, (R0015). 
Hansen, L. P., & Singleton, K. J. (1982). Generaliz ed instrumental variables estimation of nonlinear 
rational expectations models. Econometrica: J ournal of the Econometric Society, 1269-1286. 
Heckman, J., Singer, B. (1984). A Method for Minimizing the Impact of Distributional Assumptions in 
Econometric Models for Duration Data , Econometrica, 52, 3, 271-318. 
Hotz, V. J., Miller, R. A. (1993). Conditional Choice Probabilities and the Estimation of Dynamic 
Models, The Review of Economic Studies, 60, 3, 497-529. 
Hotz, V. J., Miller, R. A., Sanders, S., Smith, J. (1 994). A Simulation Estimator for Dynamic Models of 
Discrete Choice, The Review of Economic Studies, 61, 2, 265-289. 
Iyer, G. (1998). Coordinating Channels Under Price and Nonprice Competition, Marketing Science, 17, 4, 
338-355. 
Kim, M., Kliger, D., Vale, B. (2003). Estimating Switc hing Costs, Journal of Fi nancial Intermediation, 
12, 1, 25-56. 
Klemperer, P. (1987a). Markets with Consumer Sw itching Costs, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
102, 4, 375-394. 

40 
 Klemperer, P. (1987b). The Competitiveness of Markets with Switching Costs, RAND Journal of 
Economics, 18, 1, 138-150. 
Ma, Y., Seetharaman, P. B., Narasimhan, C. (2012) . Modeling Dependencies in Brand Choice Outcomes 
Across Complementary Categories, Journal of Retailing, 88, 1, 47-62. 
McGuire, T. W., Staelin, R. (1983). An Industry Equilibrium Analysis of Downstream Vertical 
Integration, Marketing Science, 2, 2, 161-191. 
Pancras, J., Sudhir, K. (2007). Optimal Marketing Stra tegies for a Customer Data Intermediary, Journal of 
Marketing Research, 44, 4, 560-578. 
Pakes, A., McGuire, P. (1994). Computing Markov-Perf ect Nash Equilibria: Numerical Implications of a 
Dynamic Differentiated Product Model, RAND Journal of Economics,  25, 4, 555-589. 
Pakes, A., McGuire, P. (2001). Symmetric Markov-Pe rfect Equilibrium, Stochastic Algorithms and the 
Curse of Dimensionality, Econometrica, 69, 5, 1261-1281. 
Petrin, A., Train, K. (2010). A Control Function Ap proach to Endogeneity in Consumer Choice Models, 
Journal of Marketing Research, 47, 1, 3-13. 
Rust, J. (1987). Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus E ngines: An Empirical Model of Harold Zurcher, 
Econometrica, 55, 5, 999-1033. 
Sudhir, K. (2001). Structural Analysis of Manufacturer  Pricing in the Presence of a Strategic Retailer, 
Marketing Science, 20, 3, 244-264. 
Seetharaman, P. B. (2004). Modeling Multiple Sour ces of State Dependence in Random Utility Models: 
A Distributed Lag Approach, Marketing Science, 23, 2, 263-271. 

41 
 Shum, M. (2004). Does Advertising Overcome Bra nd Loyalty? Evidence from the Breakfast-Cereals 
Market, Journal of Economics & Mana gement Strategy, 13, 2, 241-272. 
Su, C. L., Judd, K. L. (2012). Constrained Optimizati on Approaches to Estimation of Structural Models, 
Econometrica, 80, 5, 2213-2230. 
Viard, B. (2007). Do Switching Costs Make Mark ets More or Less Compet itive? The Case of 800-
Number Portability, The RAND Journal of Economics, 38, 1, 146-163. 
Villas-Boas, J. M. (2004). Consumer Learning, Brand Loyalty, and Competition, Marketing Science, 23, 
1, 134-145. 
Villas-Boas, J. M., Zhao, Y. (2005). Retailers, Manuf acturers, and Individual Consumers: Modeling the 
Supply Side in the Ketchup Marketplace, Jour nal of Marketing Research, 42, 1, 83-95. 
Villas-Boas, J. M. (2015). A Short Survey on Switc hing Costs and Dynamic Competition, International 
Journal of Research in Marketing, 32, 2, 219-222. 
Villas-Boas, S. B. (2007). Vertical  Relationships between Manufacturer s and Retailers: Inference with 
Limited Data, The Review of Economic Studies, 74, 2, 625-652. 
Villas-Boas, J. M. Winer, R. S. (1999). Endogeneity in brand choice models, Management Science, 45, 
10, 1324-1338. Wernerfelt, B. (1991). Brand Loyalty and Ma rket Equilibrium, Marketing Science, 10, 
3, 229-245. 
Yoffie, D. B. (1994). Cola Wars Continue: Coke vs. Pepsi in the 1990s, Harvard Business School Case 9-
794-055. 
  

42 
 TABLE 1: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS ON COLA DATASET1 
(JUNE 1991  – JUNE 1993) 
Number of Households = 370 
Number of Shopping Trips = 31062 
Number of Purchases = 5784 
 
Brand Price ($ / unit) Display Feature Market Share 
Coke $0.7996 ($0.0672) 0. 1525 (0. 1000) 0.2598 (0.1318) 0.3079 (0.1046) 
Pepsi $0.7402 ($0.0580) 0.2283 (0.1861) 0.3362 (0.2184) 0.4569 (0.1179) 
Royal Crown $0.8036 ($0.  0785) 0. 1005 (0.0817) 0.1060 (0.0933) 0.1682 (0.0898) 
Private Label $0.5231 ($0.0724) 0.1119 (0.0825) 0.0708 (0.0950) 0.0671 (0.0552) 
Note: A unit is standard size of 32 oz.  
 
 
TABLE 2: ESTIMATION RESULTS – INERTIAL DEMAND MODEL2 
 
Proposed Demand Model One-Period Inertia Model 
Segment 1 Segment 2 Segment 1 Segment 2 
Coke 1.007 (0.196) -0.190 (0.189) 1.826 (0.159) -0.118 (0.180)
Pepsi 1.100 (0.196) 0.016 (0.219) 1.951 (0.157) 0.149 (0.188)
Private Label -1.833 (0.166) -1.710 (0.158) -1.799 (0.155) -1.500 (0.138)
Royal Crown 0.535 (0.173) -0.561 (0.194) 1.033 (0.146) -0.570 (0.177)
Price -5.055 (0.227) -6.709 (0.283) -5.488 (0.204) -6.445 (0.239)
Display 1.067 (0.068) 1.456 (0.069) 1.078 (0.067) 1.556 (0.079)
Feature 0.179 (0.070) 0.428 (0.057) 0.173 (0.068) 0.431 (0.078)
Inertia 1.393 (0.050) 0.815 (0.057) 1.094 (0.046) 0.962 (0.090)
Summer -0.129 (0.061) -0.154 (0.059) -0.162 (0.060) -0.118 (0.061)
Segment Size 28.52% 71.48% 31.15% 68.85% 
Likelihood -15450 -15780 
BIC 31179 31840 
 
 
  
                                                 
1 Standard Deviations are re ported within parentheses. 
2 Standard errors are reported within parentheses in Tables 3, 4 and 5. The standard errors in Table 4 are 
bootstrapped standard errors.  

43 
  
 
TABLE 3: ESTIMATION RESULTS – DYNAMIC PRICING MODEL  
 
  Dynamic Model 
(with Retailer) Myopic Model (with 
Retailer) Dynamic Model 
(without Retailer) 
Parameters Estimates S.E. Es timates S.E. Estimates S.E. 
Pepsi 0.366 0.138 0.254 0.186 0.577 0.117 
Coke 0.433 0.158 0.336 0.219 0.636 0.130 
Petroleum 0.008 0.012 0.011 0.015 0.005 0.010 
Sugar -0.017 0.017 0.021 0.022 -0.010 0.014 
 
   
T
ABLE 4: HARVESTING AND INVESTING INCENTIVES  
DECOMPOSITION METHOD 1: SIMULTANEOUS CHANGES FOR ALL PLAYERS  
  Proposed 
Full 
Dynamic 
Model Myopic 
Model (No 
Investing 
Incentive) Static Model 
(No Investing 
and 
Harvesting 
Incentive) Investing 
Incentive Harvesting 
Incentive Net Effect 
Margin of Coke $0.17  $0.22  $0.19  -22.08% 11.77% -12.91% 
Margin of Pepsi  $0.20  $0.24  $0.20  -16.86% 19.84% -0.37% 
Retailer's Margin of Coke $0.23  $0.22  $0.20  2.51% 9.64% 12.40% 
Retailer's Margin of Pepsi $0.23  $0.22  $0.20  2.34% 12.51% 15.14% 
 
DECOMPOSITION METHOD 2: OTHER PLAYERS REMAIN DYNAMIC  
  Proposed 
Full 
Dynamic 
Model Myopic 
Model (No 
Investing 
Incentive) Static Model 
(No Investing 
and 
Harvesting 
Incentive) Investing 
Incentive Harvesting 
Incentive Net Effect 
Margin of Coke $0.17  $0.22  $0.21  -22.87% 6.68% -17.72% 
Margin of Pepsi  $0.20  $0.24  $0.21  -17.29% 11.56% -7.73% 
Retailer's Margin of Coke $0.23  $0.23  $0.21  0.75% 12.13% 12.96% 
Retailer's Margin of Pepsi $0.23  $0.23  $0.20  0.77% 14.52% 15.40% 
 
   

44 
 FIGURE 1: SHARE  OF QUANTITY  SALES  AND  CUSTOMER  INSTALLED  BASE  OF 
COKE  (RELATIVE  TO PEPSI) 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2: INCENTIVES  AND  PRICES  AS A FUNCTION  OF CONSUMER  PRICE  
SENSITIVITY  
 
 
 
 0 2 04 06 08 0 1 0 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
WeeksSharesShare of Sales of Coke (Relative to Pepsi)
Share of Customer Installed Base of Coke (Relative to Pepsi)
-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4-0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06Figure 2A: Overall Incentives versus Price Sensitivity
Percentage Change in Price SensitivityDifference Between Dynamic and Static Profit MarginsRetailer Coke
Retailer PepsiManufacturer Coke
Manufacturer Pepsi
-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.40.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1Figure 2B: Prices versus Price Sensitivity
Percentage Change in Price SensitivityPricesRetail Price of Coke
Retail Price of PepsiWholesale Price of CokeWholesale Price of Pepsi

45 
 FIGURE 3: PROFIT MARGINS AND PRIC ES AS A FUNCTION OF CONSUMER 
INERTIA  
  
   
 
       
 
 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.00.18 0.20 0.22 0.24 0.26Figure 3A: Profit Margins versus Segment 1 Inertia
Segment 1 InertiaProfit MarginsRetailer Coke
Retailer PepsiManufacturer CokeManufacturer Pepsi
0 . 00 . 51 . 01 . 52 . 00.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85Figure 3B: Prices versus Segment 1 Inertia
Segment 1 InertiaPricesRetail Price of Coke
Retail Price of Pepsi
Wholesale Price of CokeWholesale Price of Pepsi
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.00.18 0.20 0.22Figure 3C: Profit Margins versus Segment 2 Inertia
Segment 2 InertiaProfit MarginsRetailer Coke
Retailer PepsiManufacturer CokeManufacturer Pepsi
0 . 00 . 51 . 01 . 52 . 00.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80Figure 3D: Prices versus Segment 2 Inertia
Segment 2 InertiaPricesRetail Price of Coke
Retail Price of Pepsi
Wholesale Price of CokeWholesale Price of Pepsi

46 
                                                  
i This coefficient is more generally referred to as the state dependence coefficient , and captures inertia only when it 
takes positive values; it captures variety seeking when it takes negative values. In this paper, we will refer to the 
state dependence coefficient as the inertia parameter  for expositional convenience since it only takes positive values 
in our cola dataset.  
ii Unlike the random coefficients logit model, the latent class logit model yields convenient closed-form expressions 
for aggregate brand market share functions (as will be explai ned in the next section). Further, Andrews, Ainslie and 
Currim (2002) show that the latent class logit model yields aggregate estimates of brand demand, as well as holdout 
demand forecasts, that are just as accurate as thos e yielded by random coefficients logit models. 
 
iii While there are 4 brands – Coke, Pepsi, Royal Crown, and Private Label – in the cola category, we endogenize the 
prices of only the two major brands – Coke, Pepsi – in the empirical analysis. This is done for computational 
convenience. The prices of Royal Crown and Privat e Label are treated as exogenous to the analysis. 
 
iv Our demand model ignores the purchase of multiple units of a product (i.e., the quantity decision). In the empirical 
application on the cola category, which we will describe late r, first we find that the correlation between the market 
share based on purchase incidences and the market share based on quantity outcomes over all weeks in the data is 
0.92. Second, we conduct an independent sample t-test in order to check whether the means of the two market shares 
(based on quantity and incidence outcom es) differ from each other. This t-te st yields no statistically significant 
difference between the means of the two measures. We also conduct a paired sa mple t-test in order to see whether 
the two market shares differ in a gi ven week, and again find that there is no statistically significant difference 
between the weekly measures. These results suggest that ig noring quantity outcomes will not lead to biases in our 
demand estimation results. 
 
v This is a standard assumption in th e literature. Other components of marginal costs, such as inventory holding 
costs, can be considered as relatively minor  when compared to the wholesale prices. 
 
vi In the empirical application, our model estimation stops at second order with interactions. 
 
vii As is commonly done in the literature, price / display / feature of a brand are calculated as a share-weighted 
average price / display / feature over  all SKUs representing that brand. 
 
viii We have also included the prices of other raw mate rials and found that the estimated coefficients are 
insignificant. 
 
ix Substantive insights gleaned from our empirical analysis remain similar when the heterogeneity specification is 
modified to include additional supports for the heterogeneity distribution. These results are available upon request. 
 
x Although we expect the effect to be different in othe r places that exhibit larger temperature differences across 
seasons, it does not have any bearing on the measurement of the investing and harvesting incentives of 
manufacturers and the retailer, which is our main resear ch objective. We compare th e investing and harvesting 
incentives during summer  and in other seasons and find almost the same results. 
 
xi As discussed in endnote iii, we ignore the strategic aspect  of the prices of Royal Crown and the Private Label. This 
can be rationalized by the observation in  Table 1 that they have much smalle r market shares than Coke and Pepsi 
and are, therefore, unlikely to significantly influenc e the wholesale and retail prices of Coke and Pepsi. 
 
xii We calculate the sum of squared errors (SSE) from th e two models to compare the model performances. The SSE 
for the dynamic model is 1.065, significantly lower than the SSE for the myopic model that is 1.434, indicating the 
former model is able to explain better the variation in retail prices.  
xiii For the simplicity of analysis we assume zero cost and demand shocks for all brands. 
 

47 
                                                                                                                                                              
xiv In the counterfactual simulations, Pepsi is the more preferred brand (compared to Coke) in both consumer 
segments since it has higher brand preference (even though the difference is not statistically significant); and it 
displays and features more frequently. 
 
xv In order to study whether the retailer’s harvesting incentives, as well as the vertical conflict between the retailer 
and the manufacturers, are driven by the fact that the retailer is a monopolist, we run a simulation study in which we 
introduce a second retailer and assume that both brands (Coke and Pepsi) are carried by both retailers. We find that retailers continue to have no investing incentives under retailer competition, whereas manufacturers continue to have 
both investing and harvesting incentives under retailer comp etition. The reason for this finding is that customers 
who are inertial toward a brand, without any inertia toward either retailer, ca n easily switch between retailers from 
one period to the next. Therefore, neither retailer has an incentive to “invest” on either brand even under retailer 
competition. We thank an anonymous reviewer for pushing us to run such a simulation study.  
xvi Seetharaman (2004) shows that in-store display advertisin g, as well as newspaper feature advertising, serve this 
role by increasing consumer inertia toward brands in the long run.  

